Credit risk management
1Principles for the Management of Credit Risk
I. Introduction
1. While financial institutions have faced difficulties over the years for a multitude of
of attention to changes in economic or other circumstances that can lead to a deterioration inthe credit standing of a bank’s counterparties. This experience is common in both G-10 and
non-G-10 countries.
2. Credit risk is most simply defined as the potential that a bank borrower or
counterparty will fail to meet its obligations in accordance with agreed terms. The goal of
credit risk management is to maximise a bank’s risk-adjusted rate of return by maintaining
credit risk exposure within acceptable parameters. Banks need to manage the credit risk
inherent in the entire portfolio as well as the risk in individual credits or transactions. Banks
should also consider the relationships between credit risk and other risks. The effective
management of credit risk is a critical component of a comprehensive approach to risk
management and essential to the long-term success of any banking organisation.
increasingly facing credit risk (or counterparty risk) in various financial instruments other
4. Since exposure to credit risk continues to be the leading source of problems in banks
monitor and control credit risk as well as to determine that they hold adequate capital against
these risks and that they are adequately compensated for risks incurred. The Basel Committee
is issuing this document in order to encourage banking supervisors globally to promote sound
practices for managing credit risk. Although the principles contained in this paper are mostCredit risk management
credit risk is present.
5. The sound practices set out in this document specifically address the following areas:
(i) establishing an appropriate credit risk environment; (ii) operating under a sound credit-
monitoring process; and (iv) ensuring adequate controls over credit risk. Although specific
credit risk management practices may differ among banks depending upon the nature and
address these four areas. These practices should also be applied in conjunction with sound
Committee documents.1
Committee agree that the principles set out in this paper should be used in evaluating a
bank’s credit risk management system . Supervisory expectations for the credit risk
management approach used by individual banks should be commensurate with the scope and
need to determine that the credit risk management approach used is sufficient for their
activities and that they have instilled sufficient risk-return discipline in their credit risk
by supervisors.
7. A further particular instance of credit risk relates to the process of settling financial
that is equal to the principal amount of the transaction. Even if one party is simply late in
Settlement risk (i.e. the risk that the completion or settlement of a financial transaction will
1See in particular Sound Practices for Loan Accounting and Disclosure  (July 1999) and Best Practices for Credit Risk
Disclosure  (September 2000).Credit risk management
3reputational risk as well as credit risk. The level of risk is determined by the particular
arrangements for settlement. Factors in such arrangements that have a bearing on credit risk
include: the timing of the exchange of value; payment/settlement finality; and the role of
intermediaries and clearing houses.2
that provided comments.  These comments have informed the production of this final version
of the paper.
2See in particular Supervisory Guidance for Managing Settlement Risk in Foreign Exchange Transactions  (September
4Principles for the Assessment of Banks’ Management of Credit Risk
A. Establishing an appropriate credit risk environment
Principle 1: The board of directors should have responsibility for approving and
periodically (at least annually) reviewing the credit risk strategy and significant credit
risk policies of the bank. The strategy should reflect the bank’s tolerance for risk andthe level of profitability the bank expects to achieve for incurring various credit risks.
Principle 2: Senior management should have responsibility for implementing the credit
risk strategy approved by the board of directors and for developing policies and
policies and procedures should address credit risk in all of the bank’s activities and at
both the individual credit and portfolio levels.
Principle 3: Banks should identify and manage credit risk inherent in all products and
activities. Banks should ensure that the risks of products and activities new to them are
subject to adequate risk management procedures and controls before being introduced
committee.
B. Operating under a sound credit granting process
These criteria should include a clear indication of the bank’s target market and a
Principle 5: Banks should establish overall credit limits at the level of individual
and trading book and on and off the balance sheet.
Principle 6: Banks should have a clearly-established process in place for approving new
5Principle 7: All extensions of credit must be made on an arm’s-length basis. In
control or mitigate the risks of non-arm’s length lending.
monitoring process
Principle 8: Banks should have in place a system for the ongoing administration of their
various credit risk-bearing portfolios.
Principle 9: Banks must have in place a system for monitoring the condition of
Principle 10: Banks are encouraged to develop and utilise an internal risk rating system
complexity of a bank’s activities.
Principle 11: Banks must have information systems and analytical techniques that
enable management to measure the credit risk inherent in all on- and off-balance sheet
activities. The management information system should provide adequate information on
risk.
Principle 12: Banks must have in place a system for monitoring the overall composition
and quality of the credit portfolio.
Principle 13: Banks should take into consideration potential future changes in economic
assess their credit risk exposures under stressful conditions.
D. Ensuring adequate controls over credit risk
bank’s credit risk management processes and the results of such reviews should be
communicated directly to the board of directors and senior management.Credit risk management
6Principle 15: Banks must ensure that the credit-granting function is being properly
managed and that credit exposures are within levels consistent with prudential
standards and internal limits. Banks should establish and enforce internal controls and
in a timely manner to the appropriate level of management for action.
Principle 16: Banks must have a system in place for early remedial action on
E. The role of supervisors
Principle 17: Supervisors should require that banks have an effective system in place to
management. Supervisors should conduct an independent evaluation of a bank’s
ongoing management of the portfolio. Supervisors should consider setting prudential
limits to restrict bank exposures to single borrowers or groups of connected
counterparties.
II. Establishing an Appropriate Credit Risk Environment
Principle 1: The board of directors should have responsibility for approving andperiodically (at least annually) reviewing the credit risk strategy and significant credit
risk policies of the bank. The strategy should reflect the bank’s tolerance for risk and
the level of profitability the bank expects to achieve for incurring various credit risks.
3 has a critical role
to play in overseeing the credit-granting and credit risk management functions of the bank.
3This paper refers to a management structure composed of a board of directors and senior management. The Committee is
aware that there are significant differences in legislative and regulatory frameworks across countries as regards the
7Each bank should develop a credit risk strategy or plan that establishes the objectives guiding
the bank’s credit-granting activities and adopt the necessary policies and procedures for
should be approved and periodically (at least annually) reviewed by the board of directors.
The board needs to recognise that the strategy and policies must cover the many activities of
the bank in which credit exposure is a significant risk.
10. The strategy should include a statement of the bank’s willingness to grant credit
the identification of target markets and the overall characteristics that the bank would want to
achieve in its credit portfolio (including levels of diversification and concentration
tolerances).
in the cost of capital. A bank’s board of directors should approve the bank’s strategy for
selecting risks and maximising profits. The board should periodically review the financial
strategy. The board must also determine that the bank’s capital level is adequate for the risks
assumed throughout the entire organisation.
12. The credit risk strategy of any bank should provide continuity in approach.
through various economic cycles.
13. The credit risk strategy and policies should be effectively communicated throughout
the banking organisation. All relevant personnel should clearly understand the bank’s
approach to granting and managing credit and should be held accountable for complying with
established policies and procedures.
14. The board should ensure that senior management is fully capable of managing the
credit activities conducted by the bank and that such activities are done within the risk
approve the bank’s overall credit granting criteria (including general terms and conditions). InCredit risk management
the overall portfolio.
bank’s established processes should determine how much and at what terms credit is granted.
credit-granting and monitoring processes of the bank.
16. The board of directors should ensure that the bank’s remuneration policies do not
contradict its credit risk strategy. Remuneration policies that reward unacceptable behaviour
such as generating short-term profits while deviating from credit policies or exceeding
Principle 2: Senior management should have responsibility for implementing the credit
risk strategy approved by the board of directors and for developing policies and
policies and procedures should address credit risk in all of the bank’s activities and at
both the individual credit and portfolio levels.
17. Senior management of a bank is responsible for implementing the credit risk strategy
approved by the board of directors. This includes ensuring that the bank’s credit-granting
assigned. Senior management must also ensure that there is a periodic independent internal
assessment of the bank’s credit-granting and management functions.4
18. A cornerstone of safe and sound banking is the design and implementation of written
risk. Credit policies establish the framework for lending and guide the credit-granting
sound credit decisions.Credit risk management
9complexity of the bank’s activities. The policies should be designed and implemented within
capabilities and technology. Policies and procedures that are properly developed and
implemented enable the bank to: (i) maintain sound credit-granting standards; (ii) monitor and
control credit risk; (iii) properly evaluate new business opportunities; and (iv) identify and
administer problem credits.
develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure that the credit portfolio is
adequately diversified given the bank’s target markets and overall credit strategy. In
own internal exposure limits comply with any prudential limits or restrictions set by the
banking supervisors.
revised to take into account changing internal and external circumstances. They should be
credits on an individual basis and ensuring appropriate diversification at the portfolio level.
potential consequences for foreigners’ debt and equity investments in that country. Transfer
risk focuses more specifically on a borrower’s capacity to obtain the foreign exchange
necessary to service its cross-border debt and other contractual obligations. In all instances of
the potential for spillover effects from one country to another or contagion effects for an
entire region.
22. Banks that engage in granting credit internationally must therefore have adequate
and transfer risk in their international lending and investment activities. The monitoring of
country risk factors should incorporate (i) the potential default of foreign private sectorCredit risk management
10counterparties arising from country-specific economic factors and (ii) the enforceability of
loan agreements and the timing and ability to realise collateral under the national legal
framework. This function is often the responsibility of a specialist team familiar with the
particular issues.
Principle 3: Banks should identify and manage credit risk inherent in all products and
activities. Banks should ensure that the risks of products and activities new to them are
subject to adequate risk management procedures and controls before being introduced
committee.
23. The basis for an effective credit risk management process is the identification and
important that banks identify all credit risk inherent in the products they offer and the
activities in which they engage. Such identification stems from a careful review of the
existing and potential credit risk characteristics of the product or activity.
24. Banks must develop a clear understanding of the credit risks involved in more
obvious and require more analysis than the risk of more traditional credit-granting activities.
Although more complex credit-granting activities may require tailored procedures and
25. New ventures require significant planning and careful oversight to ensure the risks
are appropriately identified and managed. Banks should ensure that the risks of new productsand activities are subject to adequate procedures and controls before being introduced or
undertaken. Any major new activity should be approved in advance by the board of directors
or its appropriate delegated committee.
26. It is critical that senior management determine that the staff involved in any activity
compliance with the bank’s policies and procedures.Credit risk management
11III. Operating under a Sound Credit Granting Process
These criteria should include a clear indication of the bank’s target market and a
credit in a safe and sound manner. The criteria should set out who is eligible for credit and for
should be granted.
28. Banks must receive sufficient information to enable a comprehensive assessment of
the true risk profile of the borrower or counterparty. Depending on the type of credit exposure
in approving credits include:
• the purpose of the credit and sources of repayment;
• the current risk profile (including the nature and aggregate amounts of risks) of the
borrower or counterparty and collateral and its sensitivity to economic and market
developments;
borrower’s economic sector and its position within that sector;
limit changes in the future risk profile of the borrower; and
including under various scenarios.
be given to the integrity and reputation of the borrower or counterparty as well as their legal
essential for the bank to ensure that the information it receives is sufficient to make proper
credit-granting decisions. This information will also serve as the basis for rating the credit
under the bank’s internal rating system.Credit risk management
counterparty and be confident that they are dealing with an individual or organisation of
association with individuals involved in fraudulent activities and other crimes. This can be
should not grant credit simply because the borrower or counterparty is familiar to the bank or
is perceived to be highly reputable.
obligor. This would include aggregating exposures to groups of accounts exhibiting financial
familial ties).5 Banks should also have procedures for aggregating exposures to individual
clients across business activities.
31. Many banks participate in loan syndications or other such loan consortia. Some
institutions place undue reliance on the credit risk analysis done by the lead underwriter or on
external commercial loan credit ratings. All syndicate participants should perform their own
to committing to the syndication. Each bank should analyse the risk and return on syndicated
loans in the same manner as directly sourced loans.32. Granting credit involves accepting risks as well as producing profits. Banks should
assess the risk/reward relationship in any credit as well as the overall profitability of the
also assess likely downside scenarios and their possible impact on borrowers or
counterparties. A common problem among banks is the tendency not to price a credit or
careful analysis of the impact of these factors on the financial interdependency of the parties involved.Credit risk management
13overall relationship properly and therefore not receive adequate compensation for the risks
incurred.
provisions for identified and expected losses and holding adequate capital to absorb
as well as into the overall portfolio risk management process.6
primarily on the strength of the borrower’s repayment capacity. Collateral cannot be a
compensate for insufficient information. It should be recognised that any credit enforcement
actions (e.g. foreclosure proceedings) can eliminate the profit margin on the transaction. In
same factors that have led to the diminished recoverability of the credit. Banks should have
coverage being provided in relation to the credit-quality and legal capacity of the guarantor.
Banks should be careful when making assumptions about implied support from third parties
such as the government.
legally enforceable.
7
confidentiality arrangements (e.g. “Chinese walls”) should be established to ensure that there
is no hindrance to the bank obtaining all relevant information from the borrower.
Principle 5: Banks should establish overall credit limits at the level of individual
6Guidance on loan classification and provisioning is available in the document Sound Practices for Loan Accounting and
Disclosure (July 1999).
7Guidance on netting arrangements is available in the document Consultative paper on on-balance sheet netting  (April
1998).Credit risk management
and trading book and on and off the balance sheet.
37. An important element of credit risk management is the establishment of exposure
limits on single counterparties and groups of connected counterparties. Such limits are
with counterparties assigned better risk ratings having potentially higher exposure limits.
regions and specific products.
38. Exposure limits are needed in all areas of the bank’s activities that involve credit
risk. These limits help to ensure that the bank’s credit-granting activities are adequately
from activities and instruments in the trading book and off the balance sheet. Limits on such
transactions are particularly effective in managing the overall credit risk profile or
not driven by customer demand.
39. Effective measures of potential future exposure are essential for the establishment of
activities (both on and off-balance-sheet).
40. Banks should consider the results of stress testing in the overall limit setting and
41. Bank’s credit limits should recognise and reflect the risks associated with the near-term liquidation of positions in the event of counterparty default.
8 Where a bank has several
significantly and discontinuously over the maturity over which it is calculated. Potential
future exposures should therefore be calculated over multiple time horizons. Limits should
also factor in any unsecured exposure in a liquidation scenario.
Principle 6: Banks should have a clearly-established process in place for approving new
8Guidance is available in the documents Banks’ Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions  and Sound Practices for
Banks’ Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions  (January 1999).Credit risk management
1542. Many individuals within a bank are involved in the credit-granting process. These
different areas of the bank for various forms of credit. Banks may choose to assign
coordinate the efforts of all of the various individuals in order to ensure that sound credit
decisions are made.
transaction evaluation and approval process for the granting of credits. Approvals should be
made in accordance with the bank’s written guidelines and granted by the appropriate level of
management. There should be a clear audit trail documenting that the approval process was
complied with and identifying the individual(s) and/or committee(s) providing input as well
as making the credit decision. Banks often benefit from the establishment of specialist credit
facilities and industrial and geographic sectors. Banks should invest in adequate credit
decision resources so that they are able to make sound credit decisions consistent with their
44. Each credit proposal should be subject to careful analysis by a qualified credit
analyst with expertise commensurate with the size and complexity of the transaction. An
effective evaluation process establishes minimum requirements for the information on which
the analysis is to be based. There should be policies in place regarding the information and
and conditions of previously approved credits. The information received will be the basis forany internal evaluation or rating assigned to the credit and its accuracy and adequacy is
critical to management making appropriate judgements about the acceptability of the credit.
managing credit risks. A bank’s credit-granting approval process should establish
accountability for decisions taken and designate who has the absolute authority to approve
credits or changes in credit terms. Banks typically utilise a combination of individual
depending upon the size and nature of the credit. Approval authorities should be
commensurate with the expertise of the individuals involved.Credit risk management
16Principle 7: All extensions of credit must be made on an arm’s-length basis. In
control or mitigate the risks of non-arm’s length lending.
46. Extensions of credit should be made subject to the criteria and processes described
above. These create a system of checks and balances that promote sound credit decisions.
should not seek to override the established credit-granting and monitoring processes of the
bank.
47. A potential area of abuse arises from granting credit to non-arms-length and related
credit to such parties on an arm’s-length basis and that the amount of credit granted is suitably
monitored. Such controls are most easily implemented by requiring that the terms and
conditions of such credits not be more favourable than credit granted to non-related borrowers
under similar circumstances and by imposing strict absolute limits on such credits. Another
possible method of control is the public disclosure of the terms of credits granted to related
parties. The bank’s credit-granting criteria should not be altered to accommodate related
companies and individuals.
48. Material transactions with related parties should be subject to the approval of the
circumstances (e.g. a large loan to a major shareholder) reported to the banking supervisory
authorities.
and Monitoring Process
Principle 8: Banks should have in place a system for the ongoing administration of their
various credit risk-bearing portfolios.
control over the bank.Credit risk management
1749. Credit administration is a critical element in maintaining the safety and soundness of
agreements.
responsibilities for the various components of credit administration are usually assigned to
functional areas. Where individuals perform such sensitive functions as custody of key
to managers who are independent of the business origination and credit approval processes.
• the accuracy and timeliness of information provided to management information
systems;
• adequate segregation of duties;
• the adequacy of controls over all “back office” procedures; and
• compliance with prescribed management policies and procedures as well as
applicable laws and regulations.
management must understand and demonstrate that it recognises the importance of this
element of monitoring and controlling credit risk.
53. The credit files should include all of the information necessary to ascertain the
current financial condition of the borrower or counterparty as well as sufficient information to
determine that the credit files are complete and that all loan approvals and other necessary
documents have been obtained.Credit risk management
18Principle 9: Banks must have in place a system for monitoring the condition of
54. Banks need to develop and implement comprehensive procedures and information
systems to monitor the condition of individual credits and single obligors across the bank’s
various portfolios. These procedures need to define criteria for identifying and reporting
potential problem credits and other transactions to ensure that they are subject to more
55. An effective credit monitoring system will include measures to:
• ensure that the bank understands the current financial condition of the borrower or
counterparty;
• monitor compliance with existing covenants;
condition;
• identify contractual payment delinquencies and classify potential problem credits on
a timely basis; and
• direct promptly problems for remedial management.
ensuring that relevant information is passed to those responsible for assigning internal risk
ongoing basis any underlying collateral and guarantees. Such monitoring will assist the bank
in making necessary changes to contractual arrangements as well as maintaining adequate
Principle 10: Banks are encouraged to develop and utilise an internal risk rating system
complexity of a bank’s activities.
system is a good means of differentiating the degree of credit risk in the different credit
10See footnote 6.Credit risk management
19exposures of a bank. This will allow more accurate determination of the overall characteristics
transactions and relationships.
designed to take into account gradations in risk. Simpler systems might be based on several
will have numerous gradations for credits considered satisfactory in order to truly differentiate
59. Internal risk ratings are an important tool in monitoring and controlling credit risk. In
system should be responsive to indicators of potential or actual deterioration in credit risk.
regularly reviewed by senior management. The internal risk ratings can be used by line
management in different departments to track the current characteristics of the credit portfolio
important that the board of directors and senior management also receive periodic reports on
the condition of the credit portfolios based on such ratings.
60. The ratings assigned to individual borrowers or counterparties at the time the credit isgranted must be reviewed on a periodic basis and individual credits should be assigned a new
rating when conditions either improve or deteriorate. Because of the importance of ensuring
responsibility for setting or confirming such ratings should rest with a credit review function
independent of that which originated the credit concerned. It is also important that the
consistency and accuracy of ratings is examined periodically by a function such as an
independent credit review group.
Principle 11: Banks must have information systems and analytical techniques that
enable management to measure the credit risk inherent in all on- and off-balance sheet
activities. The management information system should provide adequate information onCredit risk management
risk.
61. Banks should have methodologies that enable them to quantify the risk involved in
exposures to individual borrowers or counterparties. Banks should also be able to analyse
credit risk at the product and portfolio level in order to identify any particular sensitivities or
concentrations. The measurement of credit risk should take account of (i) the specific nature
market movements; (iii) the existence of collateral or guarantees; and (iv) the potential for
default based on the internal risk rating. The analysis of credit risk data should be undertaken
at an appropriate frequency with the results reviewed against relevant limits. Banks should
use measurement techniques that are appropriate to the complexity and level of the risks
62. The effectiveness of a bank’s credit risk measurement process is highly dependent on
the quality of management information systems. The information generated from such
systems enables the board and all levels of management to fulfil their respective oversight
of credit risk that the bank has incurred through its various activities and determine whether
the bank’s performance is meeting the credit risk strategy.
63. Banks should monitor actual exposures against established limits. It is important thatbanks have a management information system in place to ensure that exposures approaching
risk limits are brought to the attention of senior management. All exposures should be
included in a risk limit measurement system. The bank’s information system should be able to
aggregate credit exposures to individual borrowers and counterparties and report on
exceptions to credit risk limits on a meaningful and timely basis.
64. Banks should have information systems in place that enable management to identify
any concentrations of risk within the credit portfolio. The adequacy of scope of information
should be reviewed on a periodic basis by business line managers and senior management to
stress testing.
Principle 12: Banks must have in place a system for monitoring the overall composition
and quality of the credit portfolio.
also need to have in place a system for monitoring the overall composition and quality of the
complexity of the bank's portfolios.
66. A continuing source of credit-related problems in banks is concentrations within the
credit portfolio. Concentrations of risk can take many forms and can arise whenever a
type of collateral. Concentrations also occur in credits with the same maturity. Concentrations
can stem from more complex or subtle linkages among credits in the portfolio. The
concentration of risk does not only apply to the granting of loans but to the whole range of
concentration exposes the bank to adverse changes in the area in which the credits are
concentrated.
particular industry or economic sector. A bank may also determine that it is being adequately
necessarily forego booking sound credits solely on the basis of concentration. Banks may
need to make use of alternatives to reduce or mitigate concentrations. Such measures can
additional risks and making use of loan participations in order to reduce dependency on a
11See footnote 5.Credit risk management
22particular sector of the economy or group of related borrowers. Banks must be careful not to
enter into transactions with borrowers or counterparties they do not know or engage in credit
activities they do not fully understand simply for the sake of diversification.
68. Banks have new possibilities to manage credit concentrations and other portfolio
Principle 13: Banks should take into consideration potential future changes in economic
assess their credit risk exposures under stressful conditions.
69. An important element of sound credit risk management involves discussing what
and factoring this information into the analysis of the adequacy of capital and provisions. This
“what if” exercise can reveal previously undetected areas of potential credit risk exposure for
the bank. The linkages between different categories of risk that are likely to emerge in times
and stress testing are useful ways of assessing areas of potential problems.
70. Stress testing should involve identifying possible events or future changes in
economic conditions that could have unfavourable effects on a bank’s credit exposures and
assessing the bank’s ability to withstand such changes. Three areas that banks could usefullyexamine are: (i) economic or industry downturns; (ii) market-risk events; and (iii) liquidity
conditions. Stress testing can range from relatively simple alterations in assumptions about
reviewed periodically by senior management and appropriate action taken in cases where the
results exceed agreed tolerances. The output should also be incorporated into the process for
assigning and updating policies and limits.
produce substantial losses or liquidity problems. Such an analysis should be done on a
consolidated bank basis. Stress-test analyses should also include contingency plans regarding
actions management might take given certain scenarios. These can include such techniques as
hedging against the outcome or reducing the size of the exposure.
V. Ensuring Adequate Controls over Credit Risk
communicated directly to the board of directors and senior management.
73. Because various appointed individuals throughout a bank have the authority to grant
manage effectively the bank’s various portfolios. This system should provide the board of
directors and senior management with sufficient information to evaluate the performance of
account officers and the condition of the credit portfolio.
74. Internal credit reviews conducted by individuals independent from the business
function provide an important assessment of individual credits and the overall quality of the
credit portfolio. Such a credit review function can help evaluate the overall credit
account officer is properly monitoring individual credits. The credit review function should
function).
Principle 15: Banks must ensure that the credit-granting function is being properly
managed and that credit exposures are within levels consistent with prudential
standards and internal limits. Banks should establish and enforce internal controls and
in a timely manner to the appropriate level of management for action.
75. The goal of credit risk management is to maintain a bank’s credit risk exposure
within parameters set by the board of directors and senior management. The establishment
24credit risk exposures do not exceed levels acceptable to the individual bank. Such a system
will enable bank management to monitor adherence to the established credit risk objectives.
76. Limit systems should ensure that granting of credit exceeding certain predetermined
levels receive prompt management attention. An appropriate limit system should assist
77. Internal audits of the credit risk processes should be conducted on a periodic basis to
determine that credit activities are in compliance with the bank’s credit policies and
reported to senior management. Such audits should also be used to identify areas of weakness
Principle 16: Banks must have a system in place for early remedial action on
78. One reason for establishing a systematic credit review process is to identify
weakened or problem credits.12 A reduction in credit quality should be recognised at an early
stage when there may be more options available for improving the credit. Banks must have a
administered through the credit administration and problem recognition systems.
79. A bank’s credit risk policies should clearly set out how the bank will manage
problem credits. Banks differ on the methods and organisation they use to manage problem
of the credit and the reason for its problems.
80. Effective workout programs are critical to managing risk in the portfolio. When a
concentrated focus of a specialised workout section normally improve collection results. A
workout section can help develop an effective strategy to rehabilitate a troubled credit or to
12See footnote 6.Credit risk management
25increase the amount of repayment ultimately collected. An experienced workout section can
also provide valuable input into any credit restructurings organised by the business function.
VI. The Role of Supervisors
Principle 17: Supervisors should require that banks have an effective system in place to
ongoing management of the portfolio. Supervisors should consider setting prudential
limits to restrict bank exposures to single borrowers or groups of connected
counterparties.
81. Although the board of directors and senior management bear the ultimate
measurement tools (such as internal risk ratings and credit risk models) used by the bank. In
compliance with and appropriateness of policies.
number of approaches. A key element in such an evaluation is the determination by
the quality of a sample of individual credits. In those instances where the supervisory analysis
placed on the use of such internal reviews for assessing the overall quality of the credit
portfolio and the adequacy of provisions and reserves
13. Supervisors or external auditors
should also assess the quality of a bank’s own internal validation process where internal risk
methodologies may be used as a basis for regulatory capital calculation. Guidance to supervisors specific to this purpose
will be published in due course.Credit risk management
26ratings and/or credit risk models are used. Supervisors should also review the results of any
independent internal reviews of the credit-granting and credit administration functions.
where available.
83. Supervisors should take particular note of whether bank management recognises
problem credits at an early stage and takes the appropriate actions.14 Supervisors should
monitor trends within a bank’s overall credit portfolio and discuss with senior management
and inherent in the bank’s various on- and off-balance sheet activities.
subsidiaries and national boundaries. It is important that supervisors evaluate the credit risk
management system not only at the level of individual businesses or legal entities but also
across the wide spectrum of activities and subsidiaries within the consolidated banking
organisation.
classification of problem credits and the estimation of any additional provisions and the effect
on the bank’s profitability of any suspension of interest accruals. In those instances where
supervisors determine that a bank’s overall credit risk management system is not adequate or
Such limits would include restricting bank exposures to single borrowers or groups of
connected counterparties. Supervisors may also want to impose certain reporting requirements
each other.
14See footnote 6.Credit risk management
27Appendix
Common Sources of Major Credit Problems
1. Most major banking problems have been either explicitly or indirectly caused by
to recur. Severe credit losses in a banking system usually reflect simultaneous problems in
Concentrations
2. Concentrations are probably the single most important cause of major credit
problems. Credit concentrations are viewed as any exposure where the potential losses are
bank’s overall risk level. Relatively large losses
also the potential for unusually high percentage losses given default .
3. Credit concentrations can further be grouped roughly into two categories:
• Conventional credit concentrations  would include concentrations of credits to
• Concentrations based on common or correlated risk factors  reflect subtler or
emerging markets under stress conditions and previously undetected correlations
produce widespread losses.
4. Examples of concentrations based on the potential for unusually deep losses often
15Losses are equal to the exposure times the percentage loss given the event of default.Credit risk management
28will likely produce larger credit losses for a given severe price or economic shock than a less
leveraged borrower whose capital can absorb a significant portion of any loss. The onset of
exchange rate devaluations in late 1997 in Asia revealed the correlation between exchange
rate devaluation and declines in financial condition of foreign exchange derivative
notional amounts of those derivatives. The risk in a pool of assets can be concentrated in a
which in a downturn would suffer substantial losses.
between choosing to specialise in a few key areas with the goal of achieving a market
in some volatile market segments. This trade-off has been exacerbated by intensified
providing credit to investment grade corporations. Concentrations appear most frequently to
arise because banks identify “hot” and rapidly growing industries and use overly optimistic
potential to earn above-average fees and/or spreads. Banks seem most susceptible to
overlooking the dangers in such situations when they are focused on asset growth or market
share.
6. Banking supervisors should have specific regulations limiting concentrations to one
concentrations. Many banks are exploring techniques to identify concentrations based on
common risk factors or correlations among factors. While small banks may find it difficult not
levels while remaining within regulatory limits.
Credit Process Issues
7. Many credit problems reveal basic weaknesses in the credit granting and monitoring
processes. While shortcomings in underwriting and management of market-related creditCredit risk management
been avoided or mitigated by a strong internal credit process.
8. Many banks find carrying out a thorough credit assessment  (or basic due diligence)
loan syndication techniques create time constraints that interfere with basic due diligence.
Globalisation of credit markets increases the need for financial information based on sound
accounting standards and timely macroeconomic and flow of funds data. When this
and highly leveraged institutions.
9. The absence of testing and validation of new lending techniques  is another
important problem. Adoption of untested lending techniques in new or innovative areas of the
practice calls for the application of basic principles to new types of credit activity. Any new
technique involves uncertainty about its effectiveness. That uncertainty should be reflected in
somewhat greater conservatism and corroborating indicators of credit quality. An example of
the problem is the expanded use of credit-scoring models in consumer lending in the United
States and some other countries. Large credit losses experienced by some banks for particular
tranches of certain mass-marketed products indicates the potential for scoring weaknesses.10. Some credit problems arise from subjective decision-making by senior
management  of the bank. This includes extending credits to companies they own or with
11. Many banks that experienced asset quality problems in the 1990s lacked an effective
limited and performed by internal or external auditors. The purpose of credit review is toCredit risk management
30provide appropriate checks and balances to ensure that credits are made in accordance with
relationships with the borrower. Effective credit review not only helps to detect poorly
officers are likely to be more diligent if they know their work will be subject to review.
12. A common and very important problem among troubled banks in the early 1990s was
their failure to monitor borrowers or collateral values . Many banks neglected to obtain
periodic financial information from borrowers or real estate appraisals in order to evaluate the
to recognise early signs that asset quality was deteriorating and missed opportunities to work
with borrowers to stem their financial deterioration and to protect the bank’s position. This
lack of monitoring led to a costly process by senior management to determine the dimension
and severity of the problem loans and resulted in large losses.
and to monitor the borrower can result in a breakdown of controls to detect credit-related
statements and carefully analysed them. An effective credit review department and
credit officers and other insiders are not colluding with borrowers.
pricing . Banks that lack a sound pricing methodology and the discipline to follow
consistently such a methodology will tend to attract a disproportionate share of under-priced
risks. These banks will be increasingly disadvantaged relative to banks that have superior
pricing skills.
15. Many banks have experienced credit losses because of the failure to use sufficient
31structures are most appealing to weaker borrowers because the financing enables a substantial
16. Many banks’ credit activities involve lending againstnon-financial assets . In such
the financial condition of the borrower and the price changes and liquidity of the market for
accompanied by declines in asset values for the collateral. Some asset based consumer
between the financial health of consumers and the markets for consumer assets.
17. A related problem is that many banks do not take sufficient account of business
cycle effects in lending. As income prospects and asset values rise in the ascending portion of
consumer lending often experience strong cyclical effects. Sometimes the cycle is less related
account of business or product cycle effects is one approach to incorporating into credit
decisions a fuller understanding of a borrower’s credit risk.
competitive landscape and the uncertainty of success in business strategy or management
direction. Many lenders fail to “stress test” or analyse the credit using sufficiently adverse
assumptions and thus fail to detect vulnerabilities.
Market and Liquidity-Sensitive Credit Exposures
19. Market and liquidity-sensitive exposures pose special challenges to the credit
processes at banks. Market-sensitive exposures include foreign exchange and financial
derivative contracts. Liquidity-sensitive exposures include margin and collateral agreements
32and some unwind provisions of securitisations. The contingent nature of the exposure in these
instruments requires the bank to have the ability to assess the probability distribution of the
size of actual exposure in the future and its impact on both the borrower’s and the bank’s
leverage and liquidity.
20. An issue faced by virtually all financial institutions is the need to develop
meaningful measures of exposure that can be compared readily with loans and other credit
exposures. This problem is described at some length in the Basel Committee’s January 1999
study of exposures to highly leveraged institutions.16
21. Market-sensitive instruments require a careful analysis of the customer’s
the bank and the customer to ensure that the contract is well understood by the customer. The
link to changes in asset prices in financial markets means that the value of such instruments
practice suggests should be disclosed to the customer. Banks have suffered significant losses
when they have taken insufficient care to ensure that the customer fully understood the
transaction at origination and subsequent large adverse price movements left the customer
owing the bank a substantial amount.
22. Liquidity-sensitive credit arrangements or instruments require a careful analysis of
can grow rapidly when customers are subject to such stresses. Such increased pressure to have
sufficient liquidity to meet margin agreements supporting over-the-counter trading activitiesor clearing and settlement arrangements may directly reflect market price volatility. In other
commitments. Liquidity pressures can also be the result of inadequate liquidity risk
borrower’s or counterparty’s liquidity risk profile another important element of credit
analysis.
16See Banks’ Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions  and Sound Practices for Banks’ Interactions with Highly
Leveraged Institutions  (January 1999).Credit risk management
3323. Market- and liquidity-sensitive instruments change in riskiness with changes in the
underlying distribution of price changes and market conditions. For market-sensitive
assumptions .
correlated with the creditworthiness of the borrower. This is an important insight gained from
same factor that changes the value of a market- or liquidity-sensitive instrument can also
influence the borrower’s financial health and future prospects. Banks need to analyse the
relationship between market- and liquidity-sensitive exposures and the default risk of
the borrower . Stress testing  shocking the market or liquidity factors — is a key element of
that analysis.
""
József Varga (Chapter 3)
Tamás Pesuth (Chapter 4)
Ágnes Vidovics-Dancs  (Chapter 5.1 - 5.3)
Ildikó Gelányi  (Chapter 5.4)
Géza Sebestyén (Chapter 5.5)
Eszter Boros (Chapter 6)
Gábor Sztanó  (Chapter 7)
Erzsébet Varga (Chapter 8)
Editor Gábor Kürthy
Reviewers Ágnes Vidovics-Dancs (Chapter 1)
György Surányi (Chapter 2)
".................................................................................2.2 Production of money and creation of money	 9"
".......................................................2.3 Fiat money	 18"
"............................................................................................................2.4 Modern monetary systems	 24"
"...................................................................................Bibliography	 32"
"...............................................................................................................Chapter 3 Banking Operations 33 ...................................................................................3.1 Passive banking oparations	 33"
".................................................................................3.2 Active banking operations	 36"
"....................................................................................Chapter 4 Banking Risks and Regulation 39 .................................................................4.1 Financial intermediation	 39"
".......................................................................................4.2 The role of banks and the diﬀerent types of banking	 39"
"...........................................4.3 Risks faced by banks	 40"
"...........................................................................................4.4 Banking regulation	 43"
"................................................................................................Bibliography	 47"
"...............................................................................................................Chapter 5 Securities Markets 48 ....................................................................................5.1. Basic terms	 48"
".........................................................................................................5.2. Bond markets	 49"
"......................................................................................................5.3. Credit rating	 50"
".........................................................................................................5.4 Stock exchanges	 52"
"..................................................................................................5.5 Derivatives	 57"
"............................................................................................................Bibliography	 61"
"...............................................................................................................Chapter 6 The Balance of Payments 62 .........................................................................6.1 Purpose of the BoP     	 62"
".........................................................................................6.2 Basic Deﬁnitions and Principles	 63"
"...........................................................................6.3 Constructing the BoP Step by Step	 65"
".....................................................................6.4 Concluding remarks	 70"
".............................................................................................Bibliography	 71"
"...............................................................................................................Chapter 7 Foreign Exchange Markets 72 .......................................................................7.1 Introduction to FX-markets	 72"
"..................................................................................7.2 FX markets: demand and supply	 73"
".........................................................................7.3 Exchange-rate theories	 74"
"........................................................................................7.4 Exchange-rate systems	 75"
"........................................................................................Chapter 8  Public Finance and Taxation 79 ....................................................................8.1 The economic functions of the government	 79"
"........................................................8.2 Revenues of the Government	 82..............................................................................."
ASSETS = LIABILITIES + EQUITY
Economic events can change the balance sheet in four ways:
""
➡Mr. Q. repays 100 EUR of debt plus 5 EUR interest to Mrs. S. in cash.
NN=100
FIGURE 1: PRICES BEFORE THE INTRODUCTION OF COINAGE.
FIGURE 2: PRICES AFTER THE INTRODUCTION OF COINAGE.
FIGURE 4: ACCOUNTING FOR THE MINTING OF 1 OUNCE OF GOLD.
Task: account for the changes that the debasement causes in the diﬀerent balance sheets!
""
Task: account for the changes in the balance sheets if the depository institution applies a 2 percent cut on deposited coins!
FIGURE 6A: THE BALANCE SHEET OF THE DEPOSITORY BEFORE PROVIDING THE LOAN.  FIGURE 6B: ACCOUNTING FOR A 5 SHILLING LOAN IN TWO STEPS.
loan   5promissory notes X + 5
Considering the above data the expected proﬁt of the bank on a 100 shilling loan is:
""
FIGURE 7: ISSUING A COMMERCIAL BILL.
It is even better if the bank buys the commercial bill by paying out gold coins or by issuing promissory notes. The former can be ruled out on the grounds discussed before: the seller of the bill will convert coins into notes immediately for practical reasons. The diﬀerence between the nominal value of the commercial bill and the discounted amount paid for it generates proﬁt for the bank.
FIGURE 8: DISCOUNTING A COMMERCIAL BILL.*
* the bank books the bill at its discounted value (59) instead of its nominal value (60). The capital gain of 1 shilling will enter the balance sheet upon repayment.
"The perceptive reader can observe the sentence “I promise to pay the Bearer on Demand the sum of Ten shillings.” on the English 10 shilling banknote (Figure 9). Once it meant the 		"
FIGURE 9: THE ENGLISH 10 SHILLING BANKNOTE.*
* Source: worldbanknotescoins.com
""
FIGURE 10: SETTLING BUSINESS WITH CHECKING ACCOUNTS.
TABLE 1: BILATERAL GROSS POSITIONS OF BANKS BEFORE SETTLEMENT.
X1X2X3X4X5X13 9126 0214 7001 9765 728X25 1106 2302 9187 5041 635X31 1329078 7026 4827 203X43 3748 3204393 800854X58 8272 8353 3255 5851 677
""
FIGURE 11: FINAL SETTLEMENT USING CENTRAL BANK ACCOUNTS.
FIGURE 12: THE HIERARCHICAL MONETARY SYSTEM.
Task: account for the international payment discussed above.
""
Money is created by the members of the banking system in three ways:
FIGURE 14: THE THREE WAYS OF MONEY CREATION.   Central Bank- Bank X’s account+ Bank Y’s account   Bank X        Bank Y- central bank account- A’s account+ central bank account+ B’s account   A          B+ goods- goods- bank account+ bank account
Task: account for the reverse case!
Task: account for a liquidity loan on the interbank market!
Task: account for a bank loan in the next two cases:
DebtorCreditor+ Money+ Loan- Money+ Loan
FIGURE 15: THE BALANCE SHEET OF A TYPICAL BANK IN NORMAL CIRCUMSTANCES. The dynamics of this balance sheet are as follows.
➡money creation by lending: loans and deposits increase ➡destroying money when the loan is repaid: loans and deposits decrease ➡realisation of credit risk: loans and capital decrease ➡realisation of liquidity risk: deposits and liquidity decrease BankLiquidity reserves  10Deposits                 85Loans                    90Capital reserves     15
FIGURE 16A: FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION IN THE BANKING SYSTEM.
FIGURE 16B: THE RESULT OF THE FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION. Deﬁcit AgentsBanking systemSurplus Agents+Deposit+ Loan+ Loan+Deposit-Money-Deposit-Goods+Goods+Deposit+DepositDeﬁcit AgentsBanking systemSurplus Agents+Goods+ Loan+ Loan+Deposit+Deposit-Goods
Deposits are distinguished according to the right of disposal:
According to the currency of the deposit:
According to the maturity of deposits:
""
In case of rediscounting the central bank purchases bills discounted by banks earlier.
Credits are classiﬁed into three groups based upon their economic content.
➡We talk about money credit if the client obtains the amount of credit based on a credit application according to the classical rules of lending.
Credit types according to the character of the coverage:
The types of securities are as follows:
FIGURE 1. MODERN FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION
FIGURE 2. DIFFERENT TYPES OF BANKING.
""
TABLE 3. OVERVIEW OF THE MAIN TYPES OF RISK.
Interest rate risk can be measured by several methods. One of the simplest risk assessment method is the interest gap analysis. The formula:
""
"where:	 GAP: interest rate GAP during the given period"
RSA: interest rate sensitive assets
RSL: interest rate sensitive liabilities
"GAPt=RSAt−RSLt		"
TABLE 4: BALANCE SHEET OF GAP BANK.
As a result of the calculation the interest income of the bank is 25 million EUR.
Using the GAP formula:
""
The change of income triggered by the change of the interest rate can be calculated as follows:
""
∆i is the change of the interest rate
In the above example:
""
Table 5 sums up the relation between the GAP and the interest rate risk.
TABLE 6: THE EVOLUTION OF RISK MANAGEMENT.
The Basel Capital Accord of 1988 or simply Basel 1 established an international standard around capital ratio of 8 per cent on credit risk. There are four risk classes in the risk-weighted system related to credit risk exposure. Table 7 summarises the framework for capital adequacy risk weighted assets.
TABLE 7: RISK-ASSET RATIO APPROACH IN BASEL I.
This method ignores other types of risk that banks face.
Example: RWA in Basel I Let us take a bank with the following assets in its balance sheet:
•cash: 100 million EUR
•governments bond: 100 million EUR
•interbank loans (loans to other banks): 500 million EUR
•mortgages: 600 million EUR
•commercial loans: 1200 million EUR
Types of riskBasel I (1988)Basel II (2004)Basel III (2010)Credit risk✔✔✔Operational risk✖✔✔Market risk✖✔✔Liquidity risk✖✖✔Systemic risk✖✖✔
As the value of risk weighted assets is 1600 million EUR the minimum capital the bank must hold is 8% x 1600 million EUR = 128 million EUR.
Basel II uses a „three pillars” concept:
""
•Liquidity Coverage Ration (LCR) and •Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). •FIGURE 4. LIQUIDITY AND LEVERAGE RATIOS IN BASEL III. 
AssetsRisk classWeightQuantityrisk-weighted valuecashNo risk0%1000goverments bondNo risk0 %1000interbank loansLow risk20 %500100mortgagesModerate risk50 %600300commercial loansStandard risk100 %12001200
Total capitalCredit risk + Market risk + Operational risk=The bank's capital ratio (8%)
"LCR=Stock of high quality liquid assetsTotal net outﬂows over the next 30 calendar days≧100%		"
""
FIGURE 5: THE NEW EUROPEAN FRAMEWORK FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY.
Source: European Economic and Social Committee (2009) The ﬁnancial crisis of 2008 made it clear that the harmonisation of supervisory practices and better coordination among the regulatory agencies is needed. The transformation of the new European framework serves this purpose.
NFSR=Available amount of stable fundingRequired amount of stable funding≧100%Leverage ratio=Capital measureExposure measure
""
TABLE 1: CASH FLOW SCHEMES OF 4-YEAR BONDS
TABLE 2: CASH FLOWS OF A 5-YEAR FLOATER BOND
TABLE 3: THE CREDIT RATING CATEGORIES OF FITCH
Source: Fitch (2018)
CategoryShort descriptionInvestment gradesAAAHighest credit qualityAAVery high credit qualityAHigh credit qualityBBBGood credit qualitySpeculative gradesBBSpeculativeBHighly speculativeCCCSubstantial credit riskCCVery high levels of credit riskCNear defaultRDRestricted defaultDDefault
"TABLE 1A: ORDER BOOK. BID / ASKPRICESIZEASK47110ASK4645ASK4534BID4478BID4323BID4281		"
TABLE 1B: THE ORDER BOOK REARRANGED.
The trading system combines continuous trading (described above) periods with auction periods.
Example 1: continuous trading Table 2 shows a part of the order book at a moment of the continuous trading period. The [86;1398] on the bid side means that there are orders to buy 86 stocks at price of 1398 or less. The [1405;110] on the ask side means that there are selling orders of 110 stock at a minimum price of 1405.
TABLE 2A: EXAMPLE 1 - ORDER BOOK BID (BUY) ORDERSASK (SELL) ORDERSSIZEPRICEPRICESIZE7844453423434645814247110
"BIDASKSizePricePriceSize1201400140511086139814071402101395141032013413921411803401389141475		"
TABLE 2B: EXAMPLE 1 - CONTINUED
TABLE 2C: EXAMPLE 1 - CONTINUED
The 90 stocks will be sold. The price will be the previous one (1405) which was already in the order book according to the price/time priority.
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize1201400140380861398140511021013951407140134139214103203401389141180141475
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize2014031405110120140014071408613981410320210139514118013413921414753401389
""
TABLE 2E: EXAMPLE 1 - CONTINUED
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize201403140520120140014071408613981410320210139514118013413921414753401389
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize70140014052086139814071402101395141032013413921411803401389141475
Neither of the above orders the order book until the market price reaches the given stop prices.
Example 2: Price determination at auction After collecting the buy and sell orders the overlapping part of the order book looks like the below (Table 3A):
TABLE 3: THE ORDER BOOK AFTER THE AUCTION PERIOD.
The prices where the highest transacted amount (160 stocks) can be executed are 1385 and 1390. The better one of them is 1385 because at this price there is only 70 stocks which could be transacted (there are orders to buy them at this price) but there are no selling orders to pair with them. At the price of 1390 there would be orders for 90 stocks which cannot be realised.
TABLE 3B: THE ALGORITHM DETERMINING THE AUCTION PRICE.
BidPriceAsk401380120701385403013909010014008030140570
cum BidBidPriceAskcum AskTradable          min[cum Bid; cum Ask]Cannot be realised max[cum Bid; cum Ask] - - tradable27040138012012012023070138540160160701603013909025016090130100140080330130303014057040030
""
TABLE 3D: THE ORDER BOOK AFTER THE AUCTION REARRANGED.
There are three groups of derivatives:
ST>FT
TABLE 4: COMPARISON OF FUTURES AND FORWARD MARKETS.
FuturesForwardtraded on organised exchangestraded on OTC (Over The Counter) marketsstandardizednon-standardizedlow counterparty riskhigh counterparty riskregulated marketless regulated marketdaily ﬁnancial settlementsettlement at maturityeasy to close positiondiﬃcult to close positioncheapexpensivehighly liquidrather illiquidmargin is requiredmargin is not required
""
FIGURE 5A: THE CALL OPTION.
FIGURE 5B: THE PUT OPTION.
""
Value (price) of the underlying at maturity01002003004005006007008009001000
Long Call
Short CallValue of the position-500-400-300-200-1000100200300400500
Value (price) of the underlying at maturity01002003004005006007008009001000
Long Put
Short Put
Xetra (2018): Trading. Available: http://www.xetra.com/xetra-en/trading
""
The Reader should ﬁnd some examples helpful here. Let’s decide if the next actors are residents of the U.S.:
a)an American shopkeeper living in Mexico since 1991;
b)John Deere’s subsidiary in Russia;
c)Deutsche Bank subsidiary in the U.S.
Transactions between residents and non-residents are recorded in the BoP on the basis of the following principles:
The capital account (KA) includes the following:
""
Transactions taking place over a period are the following:
(2)A Hungarian company sells services worth 6 million HUF to a foreign partner who promises to pay later.
(4)A domestic foundation grants food aid worth 4 million HUF to an African country hit by drought.
(5)The state budget repays debt denominated in EUR (worth 100 million HUF) to a foreign bank (principal payment).
(6)The foreign buyer settles half of its debt arising from transaction 2).
(8)A foreign media company successfully applies to broadcast on a domestic radio frequency. The media authority charges 200 million HUF for the use which the company promises to pay.
∑credit−∑debit=0∑credit−∑debit=CA+KA+FA+dRES=0
(6)There remains 3 million EUR still outstanding as trade credit. The other half is obtained in cash. This item involves a change in the form of a domestic claim only.
If a Hungarian company buys foreign goods - for example Swedish furniture - it has to buy foreign exchange ﬁrst: import of goods 
FIGURE 1: THE FX MARKET. →→→→
""
"The real exchange rate indicates whether a currency is relatively cheap or not. Another way of describing the theory of PPP is to say that it predicts that the real exchange rate is always equal 		"
In 2001 the Hungarian central bank introduced a ﬁxed exchange rate regime with a 
±15%
Another advantage of a ﬂoating exchange rate is that a country is more insulated from unemployment problems in other countries.
""
Allocation of resources According to the First Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics the perfect competition leads to Pareto-eﬃcient allocation of resources. In Pareto optimum no individual utility can be made better oﬀ cannot without worsening someone else’s utility.
FIGURE 1: UTILITY POSSIBILITIES CURVE
The second type of market failures is externality. When an economic actor does not calculate with every consequence of his activities we speak about external economic eﬀect. Imagine a company that works near by a river and pollutes it.
ConsumptionExcludableNon-excludableRivalrousPrivate goods (apple)Common goods (air)Non-rivalrousClub goods (theatre)Public goods (lighthouses)
""
""
FIGURE 3: SOCIAL MARGINAL PROFIT FUNCTION
""
The government can decide if the company has the right to pollute or the beach has the right for clear water. In the ﬁrst case the company gets compensation from the beach for decreasing the production from Q’. While in the second case the beach gets compensation from the factory for increasing production from zero quantity. In both cases the equilibrium is at Q*.
""
Redistribution of income Redistribution of incomes is the second economic function of the state. At Figure 1 point “C” was not eﬃcient and point “D” was unavailable. What about point “A” and “B”? Both of them are eﬃcient but are they the same from other aspects? Point “A” signs a less symmetric distribution than point “B”. What if the society prefers “B” to “A” because the ﬁrst one is a more fair situation? According to the Second Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics any of the Pareto-eﬃcient resource allocations can be achieved by perfect competition in case of the adequate initial redistribution of resources. It means that the government only has to intervene at the beginning of the process and thereafter it leaves the economic actors to decide alone. In this case the result will be Pareto-eﬃcient and fair as well. This is the base of the mixed economy: the market and the government work together side by side.
Tax is a statutory monetary payment liability imposed unilaterally by the state without any reward. Statutory: determined in a law. Monetary payment: presently fulﬁllable only by money but in the past by product or services were usual. Unilaterally: the government decides without asking the citizens. Without any reward: the tax payer cannot claim anything against it.
Tax payer is a (legal or natural) person who is imposed by the tax law.
""
""
The burden of the tax borne by the buyer is: 
FIGURE 4: TAX INCIDENCE
""
Tax rate can be expressed as a function which shows the amount of the tax payment at a given level of the tax base.
""
Average tax rate function shows the ratio of the tax payment to the tax base. It is called eﬀective tax rate as well.
pS=pt−tpt−p0p0−pS
"T=t(Y)		"
Marginal tax rate function calculates the tax burden of an additional unit of tax base.
""
FIGURE 5: THE TAXTREE.
Value Added Tax (VAT) is an indirect tax on transactions. Theoretically the tax base is the value added of the product or service between phases of production. In practice the a(Y)=TY=t(Y)Ym(Y)=δt(Y)δY
""
GDP
Gross Income
Employers social
Gross Wage
Employees social contributi
Personal Income Tax
Net Labour Income
Corporate Tax
Corporate After
Capital Gains Tax
Net Capital Income
Value Added Tax
Gross Labour Income
""
From (5) the VAT in the function of GDP if the VAT rate is 20%.
""
The gross income from capital is the companies’ taxable proﬁt charged by the corporate tax. After paying the tax the company can reinvest and/or pay some dividend for the owners. They get the net capital income after deducting the capital gains tax.
Principles of taxation Many economists and social philosophers dealt with the requirements of a good tax structure. (They agree in many aspects but there are some diﬀerences obviously.) The most important principles are the following.
➡The beneﬁt principle suggests that everyone should pay contribution proportional to the rate as (s)he enjoys public services. This concept does not calculate with the redistributional objectives. Usually those people require most public services (health care or education) who could not achieve private services.
""
""
""
➡The requirement of eﬃciency claims minimal deadweight loss should be caused by the taxation.
➡The costs of administration should be as low as possible. These costs appear at the tax authority and at the taxpayers as well.
""
""
""
""
""
""
LEONARDO DA VINCI
Transfer of Innovation
""
""
""
""
""
VALDON Ė DARŠKUVIENĖ
""
Vytautas Magnus University
""
""
""
""
""
Financial Markets
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
Leonardo da Vinci programme project
""
„Development and Approbation of Applied Courses
Based on the Transfer of Teaching I nnovations
in Finance and Management for Further Education
""
""
2010   2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
""
Table of contents ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 2
Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 5
1. FINANCIAL MARKETS:  STRUCTURE AND ROLE IN THE FINANCIAL
SYSTEM ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 6
1.1. Financial system structure and functions ................................ ............................ 6
1.2. Financial markets and their economic functions ................................ ................. 7
1.3. Financial intermediaries and their functions ................................ ....................... 9
1.4. Financial markets structure ................................ ................................ .............. 11
1.4.1.  Financial instruments ................................ ................................ ............... 11
1.4.2.  Classification of financial markets ................................ ........................... 13
1.5. Financial market regulation ................................ ................................ ............. 14
1.6. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 15
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 15
Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 16
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ .................. 16
2. INTEREST RATES DETERMINATION AND STRUCTURE ............................... 17
2.1. Interest rate determination ................................ ................................ ............... 17
2.1.1.  The rate of interest ................................ ................................ ................... 17
2.1.2.  Interest rate theories: loanable funds theory ................................ ............. 19
2.1.3.  Interest rate theories: liquidity preference theory ................................ ......20
2.2. The structure of interest rates ................................ ................................ ........... 20
2.3. Term structure of interest rates ................................ ................................ ......... 22
2.4. Theories of term structure of interest rates ................................ ....................... 22
2.4.1.  Expectations theory ................................ ................................ .................. 23
2.4.2.  Liquidity premium theory ................................ ................................ ........ 25
2.4.3.  Market segmentation theory ................................ ................................ .....26
2.4.4.  The preferred habitat theory ................................ ................................ .....26
2.5. Forward interest rates and yield curve ................................ .............................. 26
2.6. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 29
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 29
Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 30
Relevant websites ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 30
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ .................. 30
3. MONEY MARKETS ................................ ................................ .............................. 33
3.1. Money market purpose and  structure ................................ ............................... 33
3.1.1.  The role of money markets ................................ ................................ ....... 33
3.1.2.  Money market segments ................................ ................................ .......... 34
3.1.3.  Money market participants ................................ ................................ ....... 36
3.2. Money market instruments ................................ ................................ .............. 37
3.2.1.  Treasury bills and other governmen t securities ................................ ......... 37
3.2.2.  The interbank market loans ................................ ................................ ......42
3.2.3.  Commercial papers ................................ ................................ .................. 43
3.2.4.  Certificates of deposit ................................ ................................ .............. 45
3.2.5.  Repurchase agreements ................................ ................................ ............ 46
3.2.6.  International money market securities ................................ ...................... 49
3.3. Money market interest rates and yields ................................ ............................ 51
3.4. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 54
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 54  3 Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 54
Relevant websites ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 55
Review q uestions and problems ................................ ................................ .................. 55
4. DEBT MARKETS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..57
4.1. Debt market instrument characteristics ................................ ............................ 57
4.2. Bond market ................................ ................................ ................................ ....59
4.2.1.  Bond market characteristics ................................ ................................ .....59
4.2.2.  Bond market yields ................................ ................................ .................. 60
4.3. Bond valuation ................................ ................................ ................................ 61
4.3.1.  Discounted models ................................ ................................ ................... 61
4.3.2.  Bond duration and ri sk................................ ................................ ............. 63
4.3.3.  Bond price volatility ................................ ................................ ................ 63
4.3.4.  Behavior of Macaulay’s duration ................................ ............................. 65
4.3.5.  Immunization ................................ ................................ ........................... 65
4.3.6.  Bond convexity ................................ ................................ ........................ 65
4.4. Bond analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ..67
4.4.1.  Inverse floaters and floating rate notes ................................ ..................... 67
4.4.2.  Callable bonds ................................ ................................ ......................... 67
4.4.3.  Convertible bonds ................................ ................................ .................... 69
4.5. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 70
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 71
Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 71
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ .................. 71
5. EQUITY MARKET ................................ ................................ ................................ 73
5.1. Equity instruments ................................ ................................ ........................... 74
5.1.1.  Common shares ................................ ................................ ....................... 74
5.1.2.  Preferred shares ................................ ................................ ....................... 75
5.1.3.  Private  equity ................................ ................................ ........................... 77
5.1.4.  Global shares and American Depository Receipts (ADR) ......................... 78
5.2. Primary equity market ................................ ................................ ..................... 80
5.2.1.  Primary public market ................................ ................................ .............. 80
5.3. Secondary equity market ................................ ................................ ................. 83
5.3.1.  Organized exchang es................................ ................................ ............... 84
5.3.2.  Over -the-counter (OTC) market ................................ ............................... 86
5.3.3.  Electronic stock markets ................................ ................................ .......... 87
5.4. Secondary equity market structure ................................ ................................ ...88
5.4.1.  Cash vs forward markets ................................ ................................ .......... 89
5.4.2.  Continuous markets and aucti on markets ................................ ................. 89
5.4.3.  Order -driven markets and quote -driven markets ................................ ....... 89
5.4.4.  Hybrid markets ................................ ................................ ........................ 91
5.5. Equity market transactions ................................ ................................ ............... 91
5.5.1.  Bid-ask spread ................................ ................................ ......................... 91
5.5.2.  Placing order ................................ ................................ ............................ 93
5.5.3.  Margin trading ................................ ................................ ......................... 95
5.5.4.  Short selling ................................ ................................ ............................. 97
5.5.5.  Stock trading regulat ions................................ ................................ .......... 98
5.6. Equity market characteristics ................................ ................................ ......... 100
5.6.1.  Stock indicators ................................ ................................ ..................... 100
5.6.2.  Stock market indexes ................................ ................................ ............. 100
5.6.3.  Stock market indicators ................................ ................................ .......... 103
5.6.4.  Transaction execution costs ................................ ................................ ....104
5.7. Stock market efficiency ................................ ................................ ................. 106  4 5.8. Stock valuation ................................ ................................ .............................. 109
5.8.1.  Fundamenta l analysis ................................ ................................ ............. 109
5.8.2.  Technical analysis ................................ ................................ .................. 110
5.9. Processes of consolidation of stock exchanges ................................ ............... 114
5.10.  Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ...115
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 116
Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 116
Relevant websites ................................ ................................ ................................ ......117
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ ................ 118
6. DERIVATIVES MARKETS ................................ ................................ ................. 120
6.1. Hedging against risk ................................ ................................ ...................... 120
6.2. Description of derivatives markets ................................ ................................ .120
6.3. Forwa rd and futures contracts ................................ ................................ ........ 122
6.3.1.  Principles of forward and futures contracts ................................ ............. 122
6.3.2.  Forward and futures valuation ................................ ................................ 124
6.3.3.  Use of forwards and futures ................................ ................................ ...127
6.3.4.  Futures contracts: stock index futures ................................ ..................... 129
6.3.5.  Contracts for difference (CFD) ................................ .............................. 130
6.4. Swaps ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 131
6.5. Options ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 132
6.5.1.  Options definition ................................ ................................ .................. 132
6.5.2.  Components of the Option Price ................................ ............................ 135
6.5.3.  Determinants of t he Option Price ................................ ........................... 136
6.5.4.  Option pricing models ................................ ................................ ............ 138
6.5.5.  Mixed strategies in options trading ................................ ......................... 139
6.6. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 139
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 140
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ ................ 140
5 INTRODUCTION
""
Motivation for developing the course
""
Research by the members of the project consortium Employers’ Confederation of Latvia
and Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry indicated the need for further
education courses  in the field of finance and managerial decision making .
""
Innovative content of the course
""
The course has been  developed to include the following innovative content:
practices from EU integration and development perspective;
 Analytical techniques to be applied in financial markets provide  with
understanding and tools to decision makers in the firm;
of knowledge acquisition during self -study;
""
Innovative teaching methods of the course
""
The course is developed to utilise the following innovative teaching methods:
  Availability on the electronic platform with interactive learning and interactive
evaluation methods;
  Active use of case studie s and participant centred learning;
  Availability in modular form;
  Utilising two forms of learning - self-study and tutorial consultations;
  Availability in several languages simultaneously.
""
Target audience for the course
""
country.
The course assumes little prior applied knowledge in the area of financial and operation
analysis.
The co urse is intended for 32 academic hours (2 credit points).
""
Course o bjective
""
The objective of the course is to provide entrepreneurs  with the knowledge in the area of
financial decisions on the individual as well as company level .
6 1. FINANCIAL  MARKETS :  STRUCTURE  AND  ROLE  IN THE  FINANCIAL
SYSTEM
""
Mini contents   The structure  of a f inancial system
 Functions of  a financial system
 The structure and key features of financial markets
 The key features of financial intermediaries
 Major financial market participants
""
1.1. Financial system structure and functions
those who have potentiall y more productive ways to invest those funds. A financial system
makes it possible a more efficient transfer of funds. As one party of the transaction may
problem a nd inefficient allocation of financial resources. By overcoming the information
asymmetry problem the financial system facilitates balance between those with funds to
invest and those needing funds.
three main components:
1) financial markets;
2) financial intermediaries (institu tions);
3) financial regulators.
Each of the components plays a specific role in the economy.
institutions  are the key players in the financial markets as they perform the function of
intermediation and thus determine the fl ow of funds. The financial regulators  perform the
role of monitoring and regulating the participants in the financial system.
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
Figure 1. The structure of financial system  Firms  Stock market
Bond market
Short term fixed securities market  Banking sec tor
economic value. Assets are divided into two categories: ta ngible assets with physical
properties and intangible assets. An intangible asset represents a legal claim to some future
expected to provide future benefits in  the form of a claim to future cash. Some financial
instruments are called securities and generally include stocks and bonds .
Any transaction related to financial instrument includes at least two parties:
1) the party that has agreed to make future cash payments and is called the issuer ;
Financial assets provide the following key economic functions .
to invest to those who need fun ds to invest in tangible assets;
 they r edistribute the unavoidable risk related to cash generation among
deficit and surplus economic units.
The claims held by the final wealth holders generally differ from the liabilities issued by
those entities who demand  those  funds . They role is performed by the specific entities
the final liabilities into different financial assets preferred by the public.
""
1.2. Financial markets and their economic functions
A financial market is a market where financial instruments are exchanged or traded.
Financial markets provide the following three major economic functions :
1) Price discovery
2) Liquidity
3) Reduction of transaction costs
1) Price discovery  function  means that transactions bet ween buyers and sellers of
financial instruments in a financial market determine the price of the traded asset. At the
same time the required return from the investment of funds is determined by the
participants in a financial market. The motivation for th ose seeking funds (deficit units)
depends on the required return that investors demand. It is these functions of financial
markets that signal how the funds available from those who want to lend or invest funds
will be allocated among those needing funds a nd raise those funds by issuing financial
instruments.
since it is referred to as a measure of the ability to sell an asset at its fair market value at
until conditions arise to sell it or the issuer is contractually obligated to pay it off. Debt
participants are charged and/or bear the costs of trading a financial instrument. In market
economies the economic rationale for the existence of institutions and instruments is
have the lowest transaction costs.
The key attributes determining transaction costs are
 frequency of occurrence.
Asset specificity  is related to the way transaction is organized and execut ed. It is lower
without significant costs.
caused by external unce rtainty. In this case there is a possibility to control transaction
incentives for contracting parties to review the initial contract and creates moral hazard
and the higher transaction costs may be born.
Frequency of occurrence  plays an important role in determining if a transaction should
take place within the market or within the firm. A one -time transaction may reduce costs
contracting and should take place within a firm in order to reduce the costs.
market transactions.
The men tioned attributes of transactions and the underlying incentive problems are related
Opportunistic behaviour  was understood as involving actions with incomplete and
distorted information that may intentionally mislead the other party. This type of behavior
Transaction costs  are classified into:
3) costs of incentive problems between buyers and sellers of financial assets.
1) Costs of search and information  are defined in the follo wing way:   9  search  costs fall into categories of explicit costs and implicit costs.
Explicit costs  include expenses that may be needed to advertise one’s intention to sell
or purchase a financial instrument. Implicit costs  include the value of time spent in
locating counterparty to the transaction. The presence of an organized financial market
reduces search costs.
 information  costs are associated with assessing a financial instrument’s investment
collected by all market participants.
2) Costs of contracting and monitoring  are related to the costs necessary to resolve
possess limited information o n each other and seek to ensure that the transaction
obligations are fulfilled.
involving financial assets.
The functions of a market are performed by its diverse participants. The participants in
trading:
returns from holding the securities. Public investors include private individuals and
remuneration received (typically in the form of commission fees) for the services
they provide. Brokers thus trade for others and not on their own account.
return from the differences between the prices at which they buy and sell the
security over short intervals of time.
 Credit rating agencies (CRAs) that assess the credit risk o f borrowers.
In reality three groups are not mutually exclusive. Some public investors may occasionally
dealers often hold securities in excess of the inventories n eeded to facilitate their trading
activities. The role of these three groups differs according to the trading mechanism
adopted by a financial market.
""
1.3. Financial intermediaries and their functions
of funds to deal directly with borrowers of funds in financial markets. Financial
The role of financial intermediaries is to create more favourable transaction terms than
could be realized by lenders/investors and borrowers dealing directly with each  other in
the financial market.
The financial intermediaries are engaged in:   10  obtaining funds from lenders or investors and
 lending or investing the funds that they borrow to those who need funds.
either the liability of the financial intermediary or equity participants of the financial
intermediary. The funds that a financial intermediary lends or invests become the asset of
the financial intermediary.
desirable for a large part of the investing public into other financial assets —their own
liabilities —which are more widely preferred by the public.
Asset transformation  provide s at least one of three economic functions:
 Maturity intermediation.
 Risk reduction via diversification.
 Cost reduction for contracting and information processing.
""
Figure 2. Comparison of roles among fi nancial institutions
These economic functions are performed by financial market participants while providing
the special financial services (e.g. the first and second functions can be performed by
underwriting of securities).
Other services that can be provided by financial intermediaries include:
 Facilitating the trading of financial assets for the  financial intermediary’s
customers through brokering arrangements.  Surplus Units
Policyholders
Employers
and
Employees  Depository
Institutions
Credit Unions)
Finance Companies
Mutual Funds
Insurance
Companies
Pension funds  Deficit Units
Individuals)  Deposits
Purchase
Securities
Purchase
Shares
Premium
s
Employee
Contributions   11  Facilitating the trading of financial assets by using its own capital to take a position
in a financial asset the financial intermediary’s customer want to transact in.
 Assisting in the cr eation of financial assets for its customers and then either
distributing those financial assets to other market participants.
 Providing investment advice to customers.
 Manage the financial assets of customers.
 Providing a payment mechanism.
""
1.4. Financial  markets structure
1.4.1.  Financial instruments
There is a great variety of financial instrument in the financial marketplace. The use of
these instruments by major market participants depends upon their offered risk and return
the financial instrument categories is provided in Table 1.
Table 1. Financial instrument categories
Category  Risk determinants  Expected returns  Main participants
Non-
tradables  and
non-
transferables  In wholesale money
markets: transaction
volumes  In wholesale
money markets:
low In wholesale money
markets: banks
In retail markets: low
creditworthiness  In credit markets:
low In retail m arkets: banks
and non -bank firms
and households
In foreign exchange
change of currency  In foreign
exchange
markets: high  In foreign exchange
markets: financial
individual ri sks and
failures  Comparably high  Banks and non -bank
Source: Reszat B. (2008). European Financial Systems in the Global Economy
A financial instrume nt can be classified by the type of claims that the investor has on the
issuer. A financial instrument in which the issuer agrees to pay the investor interest plus
repay the amount borrowed is a debt instrument . A debt instrument also referred to as an
Euro amount or it can vary depending upon some benchmark. The investor in a debt
instruments are often called fixed income instruments .  12 Fixed income instruments form a a wide and diversified fixed income market. The key
characteristics of it is provided in Table 2.
Table 2.Fixed -income market
Market  Features  Issuers
Long
term  Bonds  Long -term obligations to make a
firms
Convertibles  Bonds that can be swapped for
equity at pre -specified conditions  Firms
Asset -backed
securities  Securitised “receivables”
presenting future streams of
payments  Financial
subordinated debt  Debt and equity hybrids  Firms
Medium
term  Notes  Medium -term obligations  Governments
Floating -rate notes  Medium -term instruments with
interest rates based on LIBOR or
another index  Firms
Short
term  Bills Short -term obligations  Governments
Commercial paper  Short -term debt instruments  Firms
Certificates of
deposit  Short -term debt instruments  Banks
Source: Reszat B. (2008). European Financial Systems in the Global Economy
required to make to investors of the firm’s debt instruments have been paid.
Common stock  is an example of equity instruments. Some fin ancial instruments due to
their characteristics can be viewed as a mix of debt and equity.
similar to an equity instrument because the payment is only made after payments to the
investors in the firm’s debt instruments are satisfied.
convert debt  into equity under certain circumstances.  Because preferred stockholders
income instrument .
The features of debt an d equity instruments are contras ted in Table 3.
payments by the issuer can differ depending on the type of financial instrument class.
Table 3. Debt versus equity
Debt  Equity
Advantages:
reputation
 for the investor  Low risk  High expected ret urn
Disadvantages:
influencing management
decisions
 for the investor  Low returns  High risk
Source: Reszat B. (2008). European Financial Systems in the  Global Economy
""
1.4.2.  Classification of financial markets
There different ways to classify financial markets. They are classified according to the
The generalized financial market classification is given in Table 4.
Table 4. Financial market classification
Criterion  Features  Examples
information and knowledge -
custody
Ways of
markets
internal market and an external market.
market and the foreign market. The domestic market  is where issuers domic iled in the
country issue securities and where those securities are subsequently traded.
The foreign market  is where securities are sold and traded  outside the country of issuers .
External market  is the market where securities with the following two dist inguishing
features are trading: 1) at issuance they are offered simultaneously to investors in a number
of countries; and 2) they are issued outside the jurisdiction of any single country. The
Euromarket  (despite the fact that this market is not limited to Europe).
Money market  is the sector of the financial market that includes financial instruments that
have a maturity or redemption date that is one year or less at the time of issuance. These
are mainly wholesale markets .
The capital market  is the sector of the fi nancial mark et where long -term fi nancial
instruments issued by corporations and governments trade. Here “long -term” refers to a
financial instrument with an  original maturity greater than one year and perpetual
securities (those with no maturity). There are two types of capital market securities: those
governments.
Financial markets can be classified in terms of cash market  and derivative markets .
purchase and sale of a financial instrument.
has either the obligation or the choice to buy or sell another something at or by some
future date. The “somethi ng” that is the subject of the contract is called the underlying
market where they are traded is called the derivatives market .
market  is such in which  financial instruments are resold among investors. No new capital
is raised by the issuer of the security. Trading takes place among investors.
Secondary markets are also classified in terms of organized stock exchanges and over -the-
counter (OTC) markets.
Stock exchanges  are central trading locations where financial instruments are traded. In
""
1.5. Financial market regulation
Many regulations have been enacted in response to fraudulent practices. One of the key
aims of regulation is to ensure business disclosure of accurate information for investment
have major advantages over other groups of investors. Thus regulatory framework has to
the role of auditors in overseeing accounting procedures.  The Sorbanes -Oxley Act of 2002
in US was designed particularly to tighten companies’ governance after dotcom bust and
companies. The US Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd -Frank) of
2010 aims at imposing tighter financial regulation for the financial markets and financial
financial regulation system development in EU and other parts of the world.
""
1.6. Summary
The financial system of an economy consists of three components: (1) Financial markets;
(2) financial intermediaries; and (3) financial regulators.
The main function of the system is to channel funds between the two groups of end users
existing wealth portfolios.
through  intermediaries and organized markets  have important advantages. These  include
and controlling transaction costs.
The field of financial markets and  its theoretical foundations is based on the study of the
markets.
The financial markets and intermediaries are subject to financial regulators. The recent
changes in the regulatory system  are happening in res ponse to the problems in the credit
markets and financial crisis that struck 2008.
""
Key terms
 Financial system
 Financial markets
 Money markets
 Capital markets
 Debt markets
 Derivative markets   16 Further readings
Brussels.
Instruments . Prentice -Hall International .
3. Financial Stability Forum (2008). Report on Enhancing Market and Institutional
5. Madura J. (2008). Financial Markets and Institutions . Prentice -Hall
International.
Addi son-Wesley .
Macmillan .
""
Review questions and problems
""
1. What are the functions of a financial system?
2. Distinguish the difference between deficit and surplus units.
3. What is t he difference between ‘saving’ and a ‘financial surplus’?
4. Discuss the advantages to deficit and surplus units of using organized financial
markets and financial intermediaries.
5. How are financial intermediaries able to engage in maturity transformation?
6. Explain briefly the difference between deposit -taking and non -deposit -taking
intermediaries.
7. Why do people simultaneously hold financial assets and liabilities?
8. Why is the average size of broker/ dealer operations in general smaller than that
of asset transfo rmers?   17 2. INTEREST  RATES  DETERMINATION  AND  STRUCTURE
""
Mini contents   Interest rate determination
 Loanable funds theory
 Liquidity preference theory
 Level of interest rates  in the economy
 Understanding of the term structure of interest rates
 Theories of te rm structure of interest rates
 Spot rates and forwards rates
 Yield curves
""
For financing and investing decision making in a dynamic financial environment of market
financial environment. Several economic theories explain determinants of the level of
interest rates. Another group of theories explain the variety of interest rates and their term
""
2.1. Interest rate determination
2.1.1.  The rate of interest
it is one form of yield on financial instruments. Two questions are being raised by market
participants:
 What determines the average rate of interest in an economy?
 Why do interest rates differ on different types and lengths of loans and debt
instruments?
Interest rates vary depending on borrowing or lending decision. There is interest rate at
which banks are lending (the offer rate) and interest rate they are paying for deposits (the
bid rate). The difference between them is called a spread . Such a spread als o exists
between selling and buying rates in local and international money and capital markets. The
spread between offer and bid rates provides a cover for administrative costs of the
financial intermediaries and includes their profit. The spread is influe nced by the degree of
competition among financial institutions. In the short -term international money markets
banks borrowing and lending rates to their retail custome rs is larger in general due to
considerably larger degree of loan default risk. Thus the lending rate (offer or ask rate)
always includes a risk premium .
Concept
Risk premium  is an addition to the interest rate demanded
by a lender to take into account t he risk that the borrower
might default on the loan entirely or may not repay on time
as compared with the Government security of the same maturity.  These are (1) the
security’s issue.
such a case it is assumed that the interest rate structure is stable and that all interest rates in
the e conomy are likely to move in the same direction.
Concept
Interest rate structure is the relationships between the
various rates of interest in an economy on financial
instruments of different lengths (terms) or of different
degrees of risk.
remain the same in money terms and make up a smaller and smaller proportion of the
borrower’s income. The real cost of the interest payments declines over time. Therefore
determines interest rates to take into account the expected rate of inflation over the period
of a loan. When there is uncertainty about the real rate of return to be received by the
The loan can be ‘rolled over’ at a newly set rate of interest to reflect changes in the
is adjusted to the inflation rate changes.
Concept
Real interest rate is the difference between the nominal rate
of interest and the expected rate of inflation. It is a measure
of the anticipated opportunity cost of borrowing in terms of
goods and services forgone.
The dependence between the real and nomi nal interest rates is expressed using the
following equation:
i =(1+ r)(1+ ie) - 1
rate of inflation.
Example
Assume that a bank is providing a company wit h a loan of
1000 thous. Euro for one year at a real rate of interest of  3
per cent. At the end of the year it expects to receive back
1030 thous. Euro of purchasing power at current prices.
cent above 1030 thous. Euro). The interest rate required by
the bank would be 13.3 per cent
The real rate of return is thus: r = i - ie
effect. It suggest s that changes in short -term interest rates occur because of changes in the
expected rate of inflation. If a further assumption is made that expectations about the rate
rates is the changes in the current rate of inflation.
Borrowers and lenders think mostly in terms of real interest rates. There are two economic
theories explaining the level of real interest rates in an economy:
 The loanable funds theory
 Liquidit y preference theory
""
2.1.2.  Interest rate theories: loanable funds theory
the level of interest rates is low and less when interest rates are higher.
The extent to which people are willing to postpone consumption depends upon their time
preference.
Concept
Time preference describes the extent to which a person is
willing to give up the satisfaction obtained from present
consumption in return for increased consump tion in the
future.
The term ‘loanable funds’ simply refers to the sums of money offered for lending and
demanded by consumers and investors during a given period. The interest rate in the
model is determined by the interaction between potential borrowers  and potential savers.
""
Concept
Loanable funds are funds borrowed and lent in an economy
during a specified period of time – the flow of money from
surplus to deficit units in the economy.
The loanable funds theory was formulated by the Swedish economist  Knut Wicksell in
capital markets for long -term debt instruments). This theor y suggests that investment and
savings in the economy determine the level of long -term interest rates. Short -term interest
According to the loanable funds theory f or the eco nomy as a whole:
Demand for loanable funds  =  net investment + net additions to liquid reserves
Supply of loanable funds = net savings + increase in the money supply
Given the importance of loanable funds and that the major suppliers of loanable funds are
it influences the supply of loanable funds from commercial banks and thereby  changes the
level of interest rates. As central bank increases (decreases) the supply of credit available
""
2.1.3.  Interest rate theories: liquidity preference theory
Saving and investme nt of market participants under economic uncertainty may be much
more influenced by expectations and by exogenous shocks than by underlying real forces.
A possible response of risk -averse savers is to vary the form in which they hold their
financial wealth  depending on their expectations about asset prices. Since they are
liquidity of their portfolios.
""
Concept
A liquid asset  is the one that can be turned into mon ey
Liquidity preference theory  is another one aimed at explaining interest rates. J. M.
determined based on the prefe rences of households to hold money balances rather than
spending or investing those funds.
earn a very low interest rate or no interest at all. A key element in the t heory is the
motivation for individuals to hold money balance despite the loss of interest income.
consume or to invest. The quantity of money held by individuals de pends on their level of
economy’s income. There is a trade -off between holding money balance for purposes of
maintaining liquidity and investing or lending funds in les s liquid debt instruments in order
to earn a competitive market interest rate. The difference in the interest rate that can be
earned by investing in interest -bearing debt instruments and money balances represents an
money balance.
Concept  Liquidity preference  is preference for holding financial
that long -term assets will lose capital value over time.
supply and deman d for money balances. The money supply is controlled by the policy
market.
""
2.2. The structure of interest rates
The variety of interest rates that exist in the economy and the structure of interest rates is
subject to considerable change due to different factors. Such changes are important to the
instruments. Figure 3 provides an overview of the factors influencing interest rates and
Figure 3. Framework for Forecasting Interest Rates
Source: Madura J. (2008). Financial Institutions and Markets.
thus the general framework for forecasting them.
paid upon it as compensation for the risk. This explains why some borrowers pay higher
rates of interest than others.  Future State of
Foreign Economies
and Expectations of
Exchange Rate
Movements
Future Level of
Household Income
Household Plans to
Borrow
Future Plans for
Expansion
Future Volume of
Business
Future Volume of
Government
Revenues
Future Government
Expenditures
Future Level of
Household income
Fed’s Future
Policies on Money
Supply Growth
Future State of
Foreign Economies
and Expectati ons of
Exchange Rate
Movements  Future Foreign
Demand for
Funds
Future
Household
Demand for
Funds
Future Business
Demand for
Funds
Future
Government
Demand for
Funds
Future Savings
by Households
and Others
Future Foreig n
Supply of
Loanable Funds   Future
Demand
for
Loanable
Funds
Future
Demand
for
Loanable
Funds  Forecast
of Interest
Rates  Future State of
the Economy
(Economic
Inflation)   22 The degree of risk associated with a request for a loan may be determined based upona
by credit rating agencies. Borrowers with high credit ratings will be able to have
borrow directly from banks at l ower rates of interest. Such borrowers are often referred to
as prime borrowers. Those less favored may have to borrow from other sources at higher
rates.
The same principle applies to the comparison between interest rates on sound risk -free
loans (such a s government bonds) and expected yields on equities. The more risky a
expensive i t will be for the company to raise equity capital.
""
2.3. Term structure of interest rates
The relationship between the yields on comparable securities but different maturities is
called the term structure of interest rates . The primary focus here is the Treasu ry
market. The graphic that depicts the relationship between the yield on Treasury securities
also referred to as the yield curve spread .
Concept
Yield curve: Shows the relationships between the interest
rates payable on bonds with different lengths of time to
The focus on the Treasury yield curve functions is due mainly because of its role as a
Treasury yield curve based on observed yields on the Treasury market is an unsatisfactory
measure of the relation between required yield and maturity. The key reason is that
securities with the same maturity may actually provide different yields.
yield curve. It is important to estimate the theoretical interest rate that the Treasury would
have to pay assuming that the security it issued is a zero -coupon security.
is referred to as an upward -sloping yield  curve or a positively sloped yield curve . A
distinction is made for upward sloping yield curves based on the steepne ss of the yield
curve. The steepness of the yield curve is typically measured in terms of the maturity
spread between the long -term and short -term yields.
as maturity i ncreases.
A variant of the flat yield  is the one in which the yield on short -term and long -term
humped yield curve .
""
2.4. Theories of term structure of interest rates
There are several major economic theories that explain the observed shapes of the yield
curve:   23  Expectations theory
 Liquidity premium theory
 Market segmentation theory
 Preferred habitat theory
""
2.4.1.  Expectations theory
The pure expectations theory assumes that investors are indifferent between investing for a
long period on the one hand and investing for a shorter period with a view to reinvesting
the principal plus interest on t he other hand. For example an investor would have no
preference between making a 12 -month deposit and making a 6 -month deposit with a view
to reinvesting the proceeds for a further six months so long as the expected interest
receipts are the same. This is equivalent to saying that the pure expectations theory
assumes that investors treat alternative maturities as perfect substitutes for one another.
The pure expectations theory assumes that investors are risk -neutral. A risk -neutral
investor is not concerne d about the possibility that interest rate expectations will prove to
unfavourable ones. Risk is not regarded negatively.
return in order to achieve greater certainty about return and value of their investments. As
Attitudes to risk may ge nerate preferences for either short or long maturities. If such is the
Question
How a yield curve would shift in response to sudden
expectations of rising interest  rates according to pure
expectations theory?
rate changes. A bond with a distant maturity (long duration) would suffer considerable
capital loss in the even t of a large rise in interest rates. The risk of such losses is known as
capital risk .
investors may require a risk premium on such investments. A risk premium is an a ddition
to the interest or yield to compensate investors for accepting risk. This results in an upward
slope to a yield curve. This tendency towards an upward slope is likely to be reinforced by
the preference of many borrowers to borrow for long periods ( rather than borrowing for a
succession of short periods).
Some investors may prefer long maturity investments because they provide greater
certainty of income flows. This uncertainty is income risk . If investors have a preference
term investments to compensate for income risk. This would tend to cause the yield curve
to be inverted (downward sloping).
The effects on the slope of the yield curve from factors such as  capital risk and income risk
are in addition to the effect of expectations of future short -term interest rates. If money
upward slope would be steeper. If market expectations were that short -term interest rates
steep (or possibly turn a downward slope into an upward slope).
Figure 4. How Interest Rate Expectations Affect the Yield Curve
Source: Madura J. (2008). Financia l Institutions and Markets  Yield
YC1
3 Months  10 Years
term (such as 10 -year) markets. Demand for funds by borrowers ↑ in long -term markets and ↓ in short -
""
Market for 3 -Month
(Short term)
Risk -free Debt  Market for 3 -Month
(Short term)
Risk -free Debt  Market for 3 -Month
(Short term)
Risk -free Debt
i
i1
i2 S1
S 2
D 1
D2
Quantity
of Funds  i2
i1 i S2
S1
D 2
D 1
Quantity
of Funds  YC2
Term to
Maturity
Panel B: Impact of a Sudden Expectation of Lower Interest Rates
""
i2
i1 i S2
S1
D 2
D 1
Quantity
of Funds  i
i1
i2 S1
S 2
D 1
D2
Quantity
of Funds  Yield
YC1
3 Months  10 Years
term (such as 3 -month) markets. Demand for funds by borrowers ↑ in short -term markets and ↓ in long -
Term to
yield curve .
Question
Why interest rates tend to decrease during recessionary
periods?
""
Question  What is the relationship between yield and liquidity of the
securities?
""
2.4.2.  Liquidity premium theory
Some investors may prefer to own shorter rather than longer term securities because a
shorter maturity represents greater liquidity. In such case they will be  willing to hold long
term securities only if compensated with a premium for the lower degree of liquidity.
sensitive to interest rate movements. Short -term securities a re usually considered to be
more liquid because they are more likely to be converted to cash without a loss in value.
Thus there is a liquidity premium for less liquid securities which changes over time. The
impact of liquidity premium on interest rates is  explained by liquidity premium theory.
""
""
Figure 5. Impact of liquidity premium on the yield curve under three scenarios
Source: Madura J. (2008). Financial Institutions and Markets.
""
Figure 5 provides a grap hical explanation of impact of liquidity premium on interest rates
and yield curve.  Scenar io 1:
Market expects stable
interest rates  Scenario 3:
Market expects a
reduction in interest Annualized Yield
Annualized Yield  Inclusion of
Liquidity
Premium
Liquidity
Premium
Removed
Term to
Maturity  Scenario 2:
Market expects an
increase in interest rates  Annualized Yield  Inclusion of
Liquidity
Premiu m
Liquidity
Premium
Removed
Term to
Maturity  Term to
Maturity  Inclusion of
Liquidity
Premium
Liquidity
Premium
Removed   26 2.4.3.  Market segmentation theory
determined independently of one another. The interest ra te for short maturities is
determined by the supply of and demand for short -term funds. Long -term interest rates are
those that equate the sums that investors wish to lend long term with the amounts that
borrowers are seeking on a long -term basis.
short -term investments or borrowings as substitutes for long -term ones. This lack of
substitutability keeps interest rates of differing maturities independent of one another. If
independent of each other. An interest rate change for one maturity would affect demand
2.4.4.  The preferred habitat theory
Preferred habitat theory is a variation on the market segmentation theory. The preferred
habitat theory allows for some substitutability between maturities. However the preferred
habitat theory views that interest premiums are needed to entice investors from their
preferred maturities to other maturities.
have a direct impact on the yield curve. Governments borrow by selling bills and bonds of
long-term interest rates (by pushing down long -term bond prices) and cause the yield
curve to be more upward sloping (or less downward sloping). If the borrowing were at the
Question
What factors  influence the shape of the yield curve?
2.5. Forward interest rates and yield curve
The expectations that are relevant to investment decisions are expectations relative to
market expectations. An active portfolio manager bases investment decisions on attempts
to forecast interest rates more accurately than the average participant in the money market.
For this reason the manager of an actively managed bond portfolio needs to be able to
ascertain the market consensus forecast. Such market expectations can be ded uced from
forward interest rates.
Forward interest rates  are rates for periods commencing at points of time in the future.
month interest rate and the current 6 -month in terest rate between them imply a rate for a 3 -
month period which runs from a point in time three months from the present until a point
in time six months hence.
The forward 3 -month rate for a period commencing three months from the present is the
the current 6 -month rate. For example if the 3 -month rate is 9% p.a. and the 6 -month rate
which is 2.69% over three months and hence 10.76% p.a.
The forward rate can be interpreted as the market expectation of the future interest rate
under the assumptions that:  the expectations theory o f the yield curve is correct and there
result can be interpreted as the mark et forecast of the future interest rate.
""
Question
What is the meaning of the forward rate in the context of the
term structure of interest rates?
The yield curve  based on zero coupon bonds is known as the spot yield curve . It is
regarded as more infor mative than a yield curve that relates redemption yields to
maturities of coupon bearing bonds. The redemption date is not the only maturity date.
""
Example
interest rate is 6% p.a. What is the fo rward six -month
interest rate for the period between six months and one year
from now? Can this forward interest rate be taken to be the
interest rate expected by money market participants?
Let x be the forward interest rate p.a. (so that the rate for six
months is x/2).
market expectation if the expectations theory o f the yield
curve is correct and there is no risk premium. If the
risk premium must be removed before carrying out the
calculation. Suppose that the six -month rate contains no risk
coupon -bearing bonds may not provide a single redemption yield corresponding to a
redemption (final maturity) date.   28 Example
rates?  Draw the yield curve.
receipt of 100 Euro after two year s.
Euro provides a receipt of 100 Euro after three years.
The forward yield curve  relates forward interest rates to the points of time to which they
rates on one year instruments to be entered into four years from the present. The implied
forward rate can be calculated by means of the formula:
(1 + 4r1) = (1 + 0r5)5 / (1 + 0r4)4
rate expected in four years’  time.
This formula arises from the relation:
(1 + 0r5)5=(1 + 0r4)4 (1 +  4r1)
which states that a five -year investment at the five -year interest rate should yield the same
final sum as a four -year investment at the four -year rate with the proceeds reinves ted for
one year at the one -year rate expected to be available four years hence. The value of 4r1
calculation for a succession of future periods produces a series  of forward interest rates.
Question
Why might forward rates consistently overestimate future
interest rates?
""
Question
How liquidity premium affects the estimate of a forward
interest rate?
yield curve. The forward yield curve requires the use of zero coupon bonds for the
calculations.
This forms also the basis for calculation of short -term interest rate futures. Short -term
are instruments suitable for the reduction of the risks of interest rate changes. Three -month
interest rate futures are notional commitments to borrow or deposit for a three -month
period that commenc es on the futures maturity date. They provide means whereby  29 borrowers or investors can (at least approximately) predetermine interest rates for future
periods.
Example
Assume that the three -month interest rate is 4.5% p.a. and
the six -month interest rate  is 5% p.a.
What is the forward interest rate for the three -month period
commencing three months from now?
over three months.
5.44% p.a. (to two decimal places).
""
2.6. Summary
Level of interest rates in an economy is explained by two key economic theories: the
loanable funds theory and the liquidity preference theory. The loanabl e funds theory states
that the level of interest rates is determined by the supply of and demand for loanable
by the supply of and demand for money balances.
Interest rates in the economy are determined by the base rate (rate on a Government
security) plus a risk premium (or a spread). There are several factors that determine the
The term str ucture of interest rates shows the relationship between the yield on a bond and
its maturity. The yield curve describes the relationship between the yield on bonds of the
forward rates provide additional information for issuers and investors. The major theories
""
Key terms
 Interest rates
 Loanable funds
 Spot rate
 Forward rate
 Term structure of interest rates
 Yield curve
 Expectations
 Biased expectations
 Liquidity
 Segmented markets   30  Preferred habitat
""
Further readings
recessions. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics
and Finance.
4. Kane E.J. (1970). The term structure of interest rates: An attempt to reconcile
5. Ron U. (2002). A practical guide to swap curve construction. Chapter 6 in F. J.
Relevant websites
 http://www.bloomberg.com
 http://www.federalreserve.gov
 http://www.ft.com
 http://www.ecb.int/sta ts/money/yc/html/index.en.html
 http://www.treas.gov/offices/domestic -finance/debt -management/interest -
rate/yield.shtml
 http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/capital_markets/ycfaq.html
 http://demonstrations.wolfram.com/PriceYieldCurve/
""
Review questions and problems
 How would you expect an increase in the propensity to save to affect the
general level of interest rates in an economy?
6. Explain how an increase in the rate of inflation might affect (a) real interest
rates and (b) nominal interest rates.
7. Why are some lend ers capital risk averse and others income risk averse? What
slope will the yield curve have when the market is dominated by capital risk
aversion?
include a term premium?
Central Bank of Estonia. Compare them. What conclusions can be drawn?
10.What conclusion might you draw about possibl e future interest rates if a
positive term premium were to increase?
11.Why might interest rate movements of various developed countries be more
central bank monetary policy that could affect interest rates. Based on the
following half a year? Provide arguments for your answer. Which factor do you
think will have the largest impact on interest rates?
13.Assume that a) investors and borrowers expect that the economy will weaken
and that inflation will decline; b) investors require  a low liquidity premium; c)
markets are partially segmented and the Government prefers to borrow in the
short -term markets. Explain how each of the three factors would affect the term
overall effect on the term structure.
15.A company X has funded its operations by bank loans extensively. The interest
rate on the loans is tied to the market interest rates and is adjusted every six
months. Thus the cost of funds is sensitive to interest rate movements. Because
company plans further growth through investments. The company expects that it
will need substantial long -term financing to finance its growth and plans to
borrow additional funds in the deb t market.
a) What can be the company’s expectations about the change in interest rates
in the future? Why?
b) How would these expectations affect the company’s cost of borrowing on its
existing loans and on future debt?
c) How these expectations would affect the co mpany’s decision when to
borrow funds and whether to issue floating -rate or fixed rate debt?
16. Assume that the interest rate for one year securities is expected to be 4 percent
only the pure expectations theory find what are the current (spot) interest rates
on two and three year securities.
17. Assume that the spot (annualized) interest rate on a three year security is 8
percent. Use only this information to estimate the one year forward rate two
years from now.
18.Assume that the spot (annualized) interest rate on a two year security is 7
percent.
a) Using only this information estimate the one year forward rate.
this information to re -estimate the one year forward rate
19.Assess the shape of the yield curve using the website http://www.ecb.int/stats/
money/yc/html/index.en.html . Based on various theories attempting to explain
between the 1 year and the 30 year government securities. Which theory
according to your opinion is the most reasonable? Why?   32 20.Consider how quickly other interest rates in the economy changed thereafter.
21.Could the MPC of the Bank of England raise interest rates when everyone was
expecting them to fall? Look at the financial press and find the current interest
spread between five -year and ten -year government b onds. Is there a positive
term premium?
22.What conclusion might you draw about possible future interest rates if a
positive term premium were to increase? How is money actually transferred
from an account in one country to an account in another?
the world economy?
24.How many reasons can you think up for preferring fixed to floating rate loans
and vice versa?
25.Find out as much as you can about:
a) the activities of the international c redit rating agencies;
b) the role of the international banks in the international debt crisis of the
developing countries.
26.What is:
a) EURIBOR?
b) a euroeuro?
c) a swaption?
d) a plain vanilla swap?
27.Look in the financial press and find examples of variati ons on plain vanilla
swaps that re not mentioned in the text.
or lose if interest rates unexpectedly rose? Why?
""
""
""
""
""
33
3. MONEY  MARKETS
""
Mini contents   The purpose of money mark ets
 Money markets segments and participants
 Money market instruments
 Money market rates  and yields
""
3.1. Money market purpose and structure
3.1.1.  The role of money markets
The purpose of money markets  is facilitate the transfer of short -term funds from agents
market participants who lack funds for short -term needs.
country’s monetary autho rity.
For financial institutions and to some extent to other non -financial companies money
markets allow for executing such functions as:
 Fund raising;
 Cash management;
 Risk management;
 Speculation or position financing;
 Signalling;
 Providing access to i nformation on prices.
transactions from 500 million Euro to 1 billion Euro or even larger ones. This is the most
active financial market in terms of volumes of trading.
From the start of emergence the traditional money markets performed the role of
methods of direct regulation and control of the savings and investment behaviour of
objectives through such measures have diminished. Current policy through market -
oriented measures i s aimed primarily at demand side. Thus money markets serve the
interface between execution of monetary policy and the national economies
financing public sector deficits an d managing the accumulated government deficits.
Government public debt policy is an important determinant of the money markets
markets (as well as debt markets). The scope and measures of monetary policy are also
linked to the government’s budget and fiscal policies. Thus the country’s money market  34 shifts are dependant upon the goals of national public policy and tools used to reach these
goals.
Changes in the role and stru cture of money markets were also influenced by
economies. Money markets went t hrough passive adaptation as well as through active
influence from the side of governments and monetary authorities.
policy autonomy. The shifts  in European domestic money markets were made by the
""
3.1.2.   Money market segments
maturity up to one year. It can be divided into several major segments:
and deficits.
new funds.
its price.
Derivatives market – market for financial contracts whose values are derived
from the underlying money market instruments.
defined in terms of instruments issued and traded. Therefore there is a considerable
overlap between these segments. Interbank market is referred mainly as the market for
market instruments can be traded in interbank market.
Key money market segments by instruments are provided in Figure 6
""
Figure 6. Key money market instruments
""
The money -market instruments are o ften grouped in the following way:
 Repurchase agreements and similar collateralized short -term loans;
 Certificates of deposit;
 Eurocurrency instruments;
 Interest rate and currency derivative instruments.
changes in all money market interest rates are highly correlated.
Major characteristics of money market instruments  are:
 short -term nature;
 low risk;
 high liquidity (in general);
 close to money.
Money markets consis t of tradable instruments  as well as non-tradable instruments .
followed by an increasin g trend to finance short -term needs by issuing new types of
behind the trend are the following:
introduction of capital risk management rules for internationally operating banks in
the recommendations of Basel II Accord and EU Directives on banking.
banking sector lending and its limitations.
In terms of risk two specific money -market segments  are:
from overnight to o ne year);
 secured debt instruments markets (e.g. REPOs) with maturities also ranging from
overnight to one year.
Differences in  amount of risk  are characteristic to the secured and the unsecured
segments of the money markets. Credit risk is minimized by li miting access to high -quality
another bank for a specified period of time during which it assumes full counterparty credit
have played an important role also.
some of the country’s money markets.
""
3.1.3.  Money market participants
Money market participants  includ e mainly credit institutions and other financial
Ultimate lenders in the money markets are households and companies with a financial
with a financial deficit which need to borrow. Ultimate lenders and borrowers usually do
proceeds to finance state budget deficits. The government debt is often refinanced by
term needs through money market securities with short -term maturities.
Central bank  employs money markets to execute monetary policy. Through monetary
central banks ensure economy’s supply with liquidity.
institutions rely on the money market for the management of their short -term liquidity
positions and for the fulfilment of their minimum reserve requirements.
pension funds .
Large non-financial corporations  issue money market securities and use the proceeds to
support their current opera tions or to expand their activities through investments.
In general issuance of money market securities allow market participants to increase their
expenditures and finance economic growth.
and government that have funds available for a short -term period. . Individuals (or
households) play a limited role in the market by investing indirectly through money
trade with each other to take positions dependant upon their short -term interest rate
imbalances   37 3.2. Money market instruments
3.2.1.  Treasury bills and other government securities
Treasury bills are short -term money market instruments issued by government and backed
by it. Therefore market participant view these gov ernment securities as having little or
even no risk. The interest rates on Treasury securities serve as benchmark default -free
interest rates. A typical life to maturity of the securities is from four weeks to 12 months.
new issue with the same maturity date as an existing issue is regarded as a new tranche of
the existing securi ty.
Question
What are key characteristics of Treasury bills?
Treasury bills are typically issued at only certain maturities dependant upon the
government budget deficit financing requirements. Budget deficits create a challenge for
the government. Large  volumes of Treasury securities have to be sold each year to cover
mix of Treasury offerings determines the maturity structure of the government’s debt.
Primary  market.  The securities are issued via a regularly scheduled auction  process.
are being solicited.
Concept
A tender  is a sealed bid.
Bidders are submitting two type s of bids: competitive and non -competitive. A competitive
the price that the bidder wants to pay. The price is set in terms of yield. The price of the
average of all accepted competitive prices. Not all competitive bids that are tendered are
accepted bids. The percentage of accepted bids is determined by the size of the issue as
compared to the amount of bids tendered. Competitive bidders are the largest financial
institutions that generally purchase largest amounts of Treasury securities. In gen eral 80 -
90% Treasury securities are sold to them.
A non- competitive bidder  specifies only the amount of the security that the bidder wants
not enough sophisticated to submit a bid price. Limits on each non -competitive bid can be
set. Direct purchases of Treasury securities by individuals are limited in many countries. In
such cases they use the services of dealers.
The Figure 7 illustrates the results of sealed bid (tender) auction. The Treasury will accept
bids.
Depending u pon the existing regulation in a specific country treasury security auctions can
be organized and held at the central bank or stock exchanges.
There are two  auction forms:
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
Figure 7.  Prices in a sealed -bid auction
part of the auction.
Concept
the same price.
""
bidder pays the bid price.
rejected bid yield (or the highest accepted bid yield) is calle d stop yield . The
corresponding price is called the stop-out price .
which is determined by the yield that was bid.  The average yield  is the average of all
competitive bidders pay the average yield.  Supply curve  Price
Accepted
bids
Rejected
bids
Demand
curve
Amount of
bonds  Price of
lowest
accepte
d bid   39 The discriminatory auction is characterized by
 a tail  – the difference between the stop yield and the average yield;
 a cover  – the rati o between the total amount competitive and non -competitive bids
tendered and the total issue (i.e. the total amount of accepted bids). .
A large cover indicates active market participation in an auction. Average cover can be
evaluated in terms of a differ ence between maximum and minimum accepted bid yields (in
basis points) A small tail shows that most competitive bidders provide similar evaluation
Concept
one hundredth of one percentage point.
In a discriminatory price auction the bidder’s price is determined by his own tender. A low
priced (or higher yield) bids. Therefore competitive bidders may be reluctant to submit low
problem of discriminatory price auction.
Concept
than that of other lower bidders.
A uniform price auction (or a Dutch auction)  does not have a problem of this kind. All the
procedures of the  auction except for the last one are the same as in the discriminatory price
auction. Each accepted bid pays the price of the lowest accepted bid.
to right with the possibility offsetting the negative effect to the Treasury (see  Figure 8).
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
Figure 8.  Impact of single -price auction upon demand curve  Price in single -
price auction
Lowest accepted
discriminatory bid  Supply curve  Price
Accepted bid s Rejected bids
Amount of
bonds  Single -price
demand
Discriminatory
demand   40 Uniform price auction is considered fairer because all competitive bidders pay the same
behaviour may offset the direct effect of higher issuer’s interest costs in the uniform price
auction.
manipulation or collusion by informed bidders.
Question
What is the role of competitive and non -competitive bidders
in the Treasury securities auction?
Secondary market.  Typically the Treasury securities have an active and liquid secondary
limitations are being placed to the amount of securities in each auction allocated to a
particular single bidder. The aim of such a rule is to prevent market from influence of a
Question
What is the role of competitive and non -competitive bidders
in the Treasury securities auction?
some readings or an example. I t can be but in the same format as the Concept/Check
Question.
Price of a Treasury bill  is the price that an investor will pay for a particular maturity
determined as the present value of the future cash flows to be received. Since the Treasury
one-year security that will ensure that the amount they receive one year later will generate
the desired return.
Example
Assume investor requires a 5 percent annualized return on a
one-year Treasury bill with a 100000Euro par value. He will
be willing  to pay the price
discount the par value at a higher return rate. This will result
in a lower price to be paid today.   41
simplified calculations are provided in the example below.
Example
Assume investor requires a 5 percent annualized  return on a 6
month Treasury bill with a 100000 Euro par value. The price
of the security will be
discount the par value at a higher return rate. This will result
in a lower price to be paid today.
The price of the Treasury bill calculated on discount rate basis is:
P = PAR  x  (1 - (d x n / 360))
of days of the investment (holding period).
Example
Assume investor requires an 8 percent annualized return on a
91-day Treasury bill with a 100000 Euro par value. The price
of the security will be
discount the par value at a higher return rate. This will result
in a lower price to be paid today.
Yield of a Treasury bill  is determined taking into account the difference between the
the yield the investor will receive if he purchases the security and holds it until maturity
will be equal to the return  based on difference between par value and the purchase price.
The annualized yield on Treasury bill  is calculated in the following way:
y = (PA R - P) / P x (365/n)
number of days of the investment (holding period).
Example
Assume investor requires pays 98000 Euro for a 91 -day
Treasury bill with a 100000 Euro par value. The annualized
yield of the security will be
y = (100000 – 98000) / 98000 ) x ( 365 / 91 )  =
difference between the price for which the bill was sold in the secondary market and the
purchase price.
The annualized yield on Treasury bill  is calculated in the following way:
number of days of the investment (holding period).
In some countries (e.g. US) Treasu ry bills are quoted on a discount rate (or referred to as
Treasury bill rate) basis. The Treasury bill discount rate represents the percent discount of
the purchase price from par value of a new issue of a Treasury bill. It is determined in the
following w ay:
d = (PA R - P) / PA R x (360/n)
number of days of the investment (holding period).
investment can be actual or an assumed convention. If a newly issued Treasury bill is held
""
3.2.2.  The interbank market loans
Interbank market is a market through which banks lend to each other.
Commercial banks are required to keep reserves on deposits w ithin central bank. Banks
with reserves in excess of required reserves can lend these funds to other banks.
these operations involve lending any funds in reserve acc ounts at a central bank.
Concept
Interbank market is a market which involves bank
borrowing and lending of any funds in reserve accounts at the
central bank.
lendi ng any funds in reserve accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank (FED).
The major characteristics  of the interbank markets are:
 The transfer of immediately available funds;
 Short time horizons;
 Unsecured transfers.
Individual banks have a possibility to invest  (lend)  surplus funds and have a source of
their assets portfolio by trading at the interbank market. This is a wholesale market with
the time. By acting as dealers they make markets for funds by announcing willingness to
buy or to sell at the current competitive interbank rate.
The interbank interest rates and intere st rates in the traditional market are interconnected.
If banks are short of liquidity they will lend less to both markets and will cause interest
terms are offered by banks. Thus they may choose other markets to invest and will cause
the drop in interest rates.   43 Interbank rates are generally slightly higher and more volatile than interest rates in the
not have sufficient funds to meet the central bank requirements drive up the overnight rates
significantly.
default by the borrowing bank.
buy orders (demand for funds) should be equal to the aggregate value of all sell orders
interest rate.
Question
How is interbank interest rate determined?
Participants in the interbank market typically undertake two types of transactions :
 reserve management transactions;
 portfolio management transactions.
Bank reserv e management transactions allow complying with contemporaneous bank
reserve requirements.
Through portfolio management transactions banks use interbank market to finance their
assets’ portfolio. These are encouraged by the interbank market liquidity and f lexibility.
transaction costs.
negotiable i.e. do not have a secondary market. A lendi ng bank which wishes to retrieve its
the distinction between primary and secondary markets is irrelevant.
Question
How has the interbank interest rate volatility c hanged over
the recent years? What is the major cause of this change?
""
3.2.3.  Commercial papers
receivable.
use CPs as a regular source of finance. Non -financial companies tend to issue CPs on an
irregular basis to meet special financing needs.
Thus commercial paper is a form of short -term borrowing. Its initial maturity is usually
less than nine months is that they do not have to register with the Securities Exchange  44 Commission (SEC) as a public offering. This reduces the costs of registration with SEC
and avoids de lays related to the registration process.
dealers may repurchase CPs for a fee.
Question
What is the role of financial institutions in the commercial
paper market?
The price of CP is calculated in the following way:
P = PAR  x  (1 - (d x n / 360 ))
of days of the investment (holding period).
whose return is expressed  on a discount basis.
Example
The price of this CP currently offering is equal to
The yie ld on CP is calculated in the following way:
d = (PA R - P) / PA R x (360/n)
the number of days of the investment (holding period).
Example
Investor has purchas ed a 30 day CP with a par value of 1
million Euro for a price of 990 000 Euro. What is the yield of
this CP investment?
d = ( 1 mil Euro  - 990 000 Euro) / 1 mil Euro  x (360/30) =
Commercial paper is normally unsecured  against an y specific assets and firms wishing to
use the commercial paper market will usually seek a credit rating from one or other of the
credit rating agencies. A high rating will mean that such paper can be issued at a smaller
large (e.g. France and US). The m ain difference between commercial papers and
commercial bills lies in the manner of their creation. A firm borrows via a commercial bill
when it agrees to ‘accept’ a bill which is ‘drawn’ by a creditor. The bill originates with the
lender. A firm borrows v ia commercial paper when it issues the paper itself.
Question
What are the substitutes for commercial paper?   45
3.2.4.  Certificates of deposit
Certificate of deposit (CD)  states that a deposit has been made with a bank for a fixed
An institution is said to ‘issue’ a CD when it accepts a deposit and to ‘hold’ a CD when it
itself makes a deposit or buys a certificate in the secondary market. From an institution’s
The advantage to the depositor  is that the certificate can be tradable. Thus though the
certificate to a third party at a pric e which will reflect the period to maturity and the
current level of interest rates.
had to pay for a normal time deposit.
million USD. The maturities of CDs usually range from two weeks to one year.
Non-financial corporations usually purchase nego tiable CDs. Though negotiable CD
purchased by money market funds that have pooled individual investors’ funds. Thus
money market funds allow individuals to be indirect inves tors in negotiable CDs. This way
the negotiable CD market can be more active. There is also a secondary market for these
Concept
Negotiable certificates of deposit  are certificates that are
issued by large co mmercial banks and other depository
institutions as a short -term source of funds.
The negotiable CDs must be priced offering a premium above government securities (e.g.
Treasury bills) to compensate for less liquidity and safety. The premiums are generall y
higher during the recessionary periods. The premiums reflect also the money market
participants’ understanding about the safety of the financial system.
Question
What factors lead to rise / decline in certificates of deposit
market?
Negotiable CDs are  priced on a yield  basis. Institution issue negotiable CDs at a par value.
Thus the yield of the security is calculated:
y = ( PAR  –  P )/ P  x (360 / n)
Example
A three -month CD for 100 000 Euro at 6 per cent matures in
73 days. It is currently tradin g at 99 000 Euro. Rate of return
of this CD current offering is
y = (100 000   –  99 000  )/ 99 000  x (360 / 73) =
46 The market price of the CD is found by discounting the par or maturity value by the rate of
The price  of CDs is determined using the following equation:
P = PAR / (1 – (i x n / 360))
Question
rates are 4 per cent.
What will be the price of this same CD if short -term interest
rates fall to 2 percent?
The annualized yield they pay is the annualized interest rate on negotiable CDs. If
the annua lized interest rate.
y = (Selling Price – Purchase Price + Interest) / Purchase Price
Example
An investor purchased a negotiable CD a year ago in a
secondary market. He redeems it today upon maturity and
receives 1 million Euro. He also receives 40000 Eu ro of
interest. What is investor’s annualized yield on this
investment?
payin g LIBOR plus 25 basis points.
Three - and six -month maturities are common. Some CDs are issued for one year and even
for two years but the market for these is compar atively thin. This has led to the practice of
specified terms. CDs are issued by a wide variety of banks. It is quite common for a bank
CDs with a maturity expected to coincide with a liquidity surplus and hold CDs expected
to mature at a time of shortage.
""
3.2.5.  Repurchase agreements
A repurchase agreement (REPO)  is an agreement to bu y any securities from a seller
with the agreement that they will be repurchased at some specified date and price in the
future.
Concept
Repurchase agreement (REPO) is a fully collateralize loan
in wich the collateral consists of marketable securities.
In essence the REPO transaction represents a loan backed by securities. If the borrower
papers and negotiable Certificates of Deposit.
to other money market transactions.
Concept
but renewed each day upon agreement of both counterparties.
""
Concept
Term REPO is a REPO with a maturity of more than one
day.
A reverse REPO  transaction is a purch ase of securities by one party from another with the
agreement to sell them. Thus a REPO and a reverse REPO can refer to the same
transaction but from different perspectives and is used to borrow securities and to lend
cash.
institutions. The transactions can amount 10 million in USD terms with the maturity from
equivalent of the borrower and the buyer is the lender. The repurchase price is higher than
The amount of REPO loan is determined in the following way:
REPO principal = Securities market value x ( 1 – Haircut )
Securities market value = PAR x ( 1 – (d x n / 360 ))
where the secu rities market value is determined as the current market value of these
par value of the securities.
which the borrowing takes place. Since the value of the securities may be fluctuating
value of the securities.
The deduction fro m current market value of the securities collateral required to do the
collateral exceeds the loan principal and the haircut.
Repurchase of the securities is made by repaying REPO loan and interest:
REPO principal + Interest = REPO principal ( 1 + (y x t  / 360 ))
REPO principal = Securities market value x (1 – Haircut)
Securities market value is defined as present value of the par value of the securities
involved in the transaction.
Concept
Haircut  – the function of a broker/ dealer’s securities
capital to act as a cushion against loss.   48
The haircut or margin offers some protection to the lender in ca se the borrower goes
the lender owns the securities and can sell them in the case of default. In some REPO
acting as collateral while remaining in t he legal ownership of the borrower. In the case of
likely to be greater.
Example
discount of 5% and a par value of 10 million Euro are used as
collateral. Assume that the haircut is equal to 25 basis points.
What is the amount of REPO loan? What is the amount of
REPO loan repayment in the transaction?
REPO de als are quoted on a yield  basis. The rate is quoted as a simple interest yield on a
360 days basis set upon initiation of the transaction and fixed for the term of REPO.
The REPO rate or yield is calculated:
y =  ( PAR – P ) / P x (360 / t )
transaction.
Example
Investor has purchased securities at a price of 9 980 000
At the end of 15 days period. What  is the yield of the
transaction?
REPO transactions have two legs: 1) when cash is borrowed against collateral; 2) when
interest.
The repurchase of the securities (RE PO payment) is completely independent from the
market value of the securities on the maturity date of the REPO. This reinforces the
economic reality that REPO transaction is a collateralized loan.
In a reverse REPO transaction the reverse payment is calcul ated:
Reverse principal + Interest = Reverse principal x ( 1 + (y x t / 360))
Example
Assume a financial institution utilizes a reverse REPO to
borrow securities and to lend cash. The securities collateral is
1 million of par value government securities paying 6% p.a.
the amount of reverse REPO repayment of the tr ansaction?
REPO and reverse REPO markets  as well as number of their participants have grown up
opportunity cost of holding idle cash.
49 Question
What determines the size  of the REPO principal? What
determines the size of the REPO repayment?
REPO transactions are negotiated through a telecommunications network. Dealers and
REPO brokers perform the role of financial intermediaries to create REPO transactions fro
counterparty for it.
corporations.
Central banks conduct short -term REPO transactions on bonds of any residual maturity as
a means of influencing money market interest rates. ‘
REPOs to earn interest on their cash balances during the periods of high interest rates.
Speculative REPO and reverse REPO transactions are attractive to financial institutions
with the increased volatility of interest rates. Money market funds often take the other side
of REPO transactions and hold reverses in their assets portfolios as flexible short -term
reverses. The fund managers may speculate on interest rate flu ctuations using REPOs and
reverse REPOs without being subject to the limitations on speculative derivative
transactions. Important participants of the REPO market are security dealers. They make
Interest yields for REPOs of different terms reflect a term structure of interest rates which
is a market consensus on forecasted interest rates. The REPO rate is significantly lower
maintained by possibility to substitute different m oney market instruments. There is no
REPO secondary market.
""
3.2.6.  International money market securities
Apart from variety of money market instruments which enable short -term lending and
growing markets have been the so -called eurocurrency markets. These are markets in
which the borrowing and lending denominated in a currency of some other country takes
trading can also take place anywhere (in European countries or in Ne w York or Tokyo or
Hong Kong).
Concept
Eurocurrency instrument  is any instrument denominated in
a currency which differs from that of the country in which it
is traded.
The factor contributing to the long -term development of eurocurrency business was t he
ability of eurobanks to offer their services at more competitive rates than domestic
institutions. ‘Eurobanks’ are banks which specialize in eurocurrency business. They
help to use funds which might otherwise lay idle.
In the Eurodollar market banks channel the deposited funds to other companies which
need to receive Eur odollar loans. The deposit and loan transactions are of large
corporations can participate in the market. The market growth was influenced greatly by
Eurocurrency liabiliti es of financial institutions are the following:
 Euro Certificates of deposits
 Interbank placements
 Time deposits
 Call money
Euro certificates of deposits (Euro CDs)  are negotiable deposits with a fixed time to
maturity.
Time deposits  are non negotiable dep osits with a fixed time to maturity. Due to illiquidity
their yields tend to be higher than the yields on equivalent maturity of negotiable Euro
certificates of deposits.
time deposits.
Call money  are non negotiable deposits with a fixed maturity that can be withdrawn at any
time.
Eurocurrency assets  of financial institutions are the following:
 Euro Commercial Papers (Euro CPs)
 Syndicated Euroloans
 Euronotes
Euro Commerci al Papers (Euro CPs) are securitized short -term bearer notes issued by a
large well -known corporation.  They are issued only by private corporations in short
maturities with the aim to provide short -term investments with a broad currency choice for
interna tional investors. Most issues are pure discount zero coupon debt securities with
maturities from 7 to 365 days. Issuance may be conducted through an appointed panel of
dealers.It can be resold in a highly liquid secondary market. The issuers should be high ly
rated as Euro CPs are unsecured.
Syndicated Euroloans are related to bank lending of Eurocurrency deposits to non -
role of syndication is to share loan risks among the banks that members of the syndicate.
according to some predete rmined market interest rate (e.g. LIBOR). For a high rated issuer
the interest rate can be set lower than LIBOR.
51 3.3. Money market interest rates and yields
Short -term money market instruments have different interest rate and yield quoting
conventions. The yie ld on short -term money market instruments is often calculated using
with the yields to maturity.
on” basis.
money market instruments frequently do not have a specified coupon and as a result
investors in them obtain a return by buying them at a discount to their par or maturity
value.
Below is provide the co mparison of different money market rates and yields.
""
1) Rate on a discount basis
d =  ( PAR – P ) / PAR x (360 / t )
price of the  security and t is the number of days u ntil maturity.
Discount is calculated in this case as a percent from par value. It also assumes a 360 days
year.
Example  A 90 day US dollar Treasury bill is issued at 99% of its par
value. It will be redeemed at its par value (100 %) 90 days
after issue. It is traded on a discount basis. The discount of
this issue  is:
d = (100 − 99) / 100 × 360 / 90 = 4%
Note that in the US dollar money market a year is assumed to
have 360 days.
The discount is often converted into a yield so as to make it comparable with other money
market instruments. This yield is often called a ‘m oney market yield’. Using the above
""
2) Add-on rate
y =  ( PAR – P ) / P x (360 / t )
the security and  t is the number of days until maturity.
Example
Assume 990 000 Euro is lent for a 90 day period at the add -
on rate. The par value is 1000 000 Euro.
The annualized yield of the security at an add -on basis will be
y = (1000000 – 990000) / 990000 ) x ( 3 60 / 90 )  =
52 3) Bond -equivalent yield
y =  ( PAR – P ) / P x (365 / t )
number of days until maturity.
Example
Assume the same 90 day US dollar  Treasury bill issued at
99% of its par value. It will be redeemed at its par value (100
%) 90 days after issue. The bond equivalent yield this issue
is:
The bond equivalent yield is used to compare Treasury bill yields with the yields to
maturity of coupon bearing Treasury notes and bonds. The bond equivalent yield is is an
approximation of the yield to maturity o f a bond.
The bond equivalent yield is higher than the discount rate. The difference is larger for
longer maturities and for higher levels of discount rate d. Therefore an error of yield using
discount rate d increases for longer maturities and for higher  rates.
""
4) Annual yield to maturity
y =  ( PAR  / P ) (365 / t ) – 1
and t is the number of days until maturity.
Example
Assume the same 90 day US dollar Treasury bil l issued at
99% of its par value. It will be redeemed at its par value (100
%) 90 days after issue.
Annual yield to maturity of this money market instrument is:
""
5) Semiannual yield to maturity
y =  2 x ( PAR  / P ) (365 /2 t ) – 2
purchase price of the  security and t is the number of days until maturity.
Example
Assume the same 90 day US dollar Treasury bill issued at
99% of its  par value. It will be redeemed at its par value (100
%) 90 days after issue.
The semiannual yield to maturity of this money market
instrument is:
Comparison of all the money markets rates and yields are pr ovided in Figure 9.
basis. The difference betwee n bond equivalent yield and the semiannual yield are smaller
for longer maturities and approach as the maturity approaches half a year. The longer the
discount rate and other rates.
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
Figure 9. Money market rates and yields
Several specific money market interest rates are used in Europe.
The Governing Council of the ECB sets the level of the minimum bid rate in the
aims t o supply the liquidity necessary for the banking system to operate smoothly. This
way very short -term money market interest rates are aligned with the monetary policy of
saving and investment decisions and thus will affect price developments in the euro area.
provide additional liquidity in order to support market confidence.
market:
 EONIA (euro overnight index average).  The EONIA is the effective overnight
reference ra te for the euro. It is computed daily as a volume -weighted average of
by a representative panel of large banks.
 EURIBOR (euro interbank offered rate).  The EURIBOR is the ben chmark rate
of the large unsecured euro money market for maturities longer than overnight (one
week to one year) that has emerged since 1999. It is based on information provided
by the same panel of banks.    90 180 Days  Discount rate  Add-on rate  Annual Semiannual
Bond equivalent yield  Rate  54  EUREPO  (the REPO market reference rate for the eur o) for different maturities.
The EUREPO is the benchmark rate of the euro REPO market and has been
released since March 2002. It is the rate at which one prime bank offers funds in
euros to another prime bank when the funds are secured by a REPO transactio n
using general collateral.
 The rate of interest paid on interbank loans in London (UK) is known as London
InterBank Offer Rate or LIBOR . It is an important reference to banks of the cost
of raising immediate marginal funds. Numerous bank interest rates ar e therefore
The spreads among the key ECB interest rates and short -term market interest rates are low.
spread (about 6 to 7 basis points) reflects that the EONIA is an unsecured interbank rate. It
includes a small premium for credit risk and transaction costs. Larger spreads normally
occur at the end of the reserve maintenance period when there is a need for the banks to
fulfil the reserve requirement.
The yields of money market securities are closely monitored by money market
exchange them to achieve more attractive yields. This causes yields among the securities
instruments and will favour the ones with high -yield. During the periods of larger
securities to Treasury bills and other government securities.
""
3.4. Summary
active. The volume of transactions in national markets as well as international markets is
large. A variety of money market securities allow to meet special needs of borrowers and
lenders.
""
Key terms
 Money market
 Commercial paper
 Certificate of deposit
 REPO
 Treasury bills
 Interbank market
""
Further readings
Main.   55 3. European Central Bank (2008). The Analysis of the Euro Money Market from a
5. International Capital Market Association (2007). European REPO Market
Occasional Paper 25.
""
Relevant websites
 http://news.ft.com/home/uk
 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk
 http://www.ecb.int/pub
 http://www.bis.org/publ
""
Review questions and problems
1. How do money markets differ from capital markets?
2. Who are the main participants of money mark ets?
3. What is the difference between money market instruments quoted ‘on a discount
basis’ and ‘on a yield basis’?
4. How are government securities (e.g. Treasury - bills) priced?
5. How are commercial papers priced?
6. How are certificates of deposit priced?
7. How a re REPO agreements priced?
8. Assume that one -month government security and one -month CDs are both
quoted as having a yield of 5 per cent. Which gives the higher yield to an
investor?
9. Suppose that long -term interest rates are expected to fall in future. How i s this
to influence the supply of commercial paper and why?
10. Assume that the government makes a major sale of bonds to the private sector.
Explain the likely effect on
a) liquidity of the banking system;
b) demand for money market instruments.
11. Imagine th at the central bank is concerned about the rate of growth of credit in
the economy. Explain how it might use its position in the REPO market to
address this problem.
12. How can the central bank of a country use REPOs on government bonds to
until maturity?
14. Government is selling its 91 days securities with the face value of 1 000 000
Euro for 880 000 Euro.
securities until maturity?
b) How can the annualized yield be affected if the purchase price is lower?
c) How can the annualized yield be a ffected if the selling price is lower?
Explain the logic of the relationship.
d) How would the annualized yield be affected if the number of holding days
relationship.
15. A compan y has received a substantial loan from commercial banks. The
interest rate on the loans is tied to market interest rates and is adjusted every six
months. The company has obtained a credit line to satisfy temporary funds
company may be in need to increase its production  capacity by about 40 percent
slow down in the economy due to possible actions of European central bank
aimed at sustaining the inflation rate low.   The company needs funding to co ver
payments to suppliers. It is also considering other possibilities of financing in
the money market. The interest rate that the company is paying for its line of
credit is less than the prevailing commercial paper interest rate of highly rated
companies .
a) Should the company issue commercial paper on this prevailing interest rate?
b) Should the company sell its holding of government securities to cover the
payments to suppliers?
c) Should the company use its credit line?
d) Which alternative has the lowest cost for the company? Provide the
reasoning.
""
57 4. DEBT  MARKETS
""
Mini contents   The characteristics of debt markets
 The characteristics of debt instruments
 Valuation of bonds
 Bond duration and convexity
 Callable bonds and other bond instruments
""
4.1. Debt market instr ument characteristics
Debt markets are used by both firms and governments to raise funds for long -term
term borrowing instruments for the issuer.
Corporate as well as government bonds vary very considerably in terms of their risk. Some
bonds are unsecured. Bonds secured on the assets of the issuing company are known as
debentures. Bonds that are not secured are referred to as loan stock. Banks are major
issuers of loan stock. The fact that unsecu red bonds do not provide their holders with a
claim on the assets of the issuing firm in the event of default is normally compensated for
by means of a higher rate of coupon payment.
Important characteristics of bonds  involve:
The conventional or straight  bond has the following characteristics:
any bond shortens. Bonds are classified into ‘short -term’ (with lives up to five
years); ‘medium -term’(from five to fifteen years) ; ‘ long-term’(over fifteen years).
bond’s coupon.
The coupon divided by the par value  of the bo nd (100 Euro) gives the coupon
rate on the bond.
The par or redemption value  of bonds is commonly 100 Euro (or other currency).
This is also the price at which bonds are first issued.
in such a way as to make the bonds unattractive at their existing coupon at the time
price above 100 Euro. In these cases the issuers are making a last -minute
adjustment to the price which they hope will make the bonds acceptable to the
market.
where the coupon expressed as a percentage of the current price  approximates the
new market rate.
The yield on bonds  are expressed commonly in two forms:
 redemption yield;
 inter est yield or running yield .
Concept
Interest yield (or running yield) - the return on a bond
taking account only of the coupon payments.
""
Concept
Yield to maturity or redemption yield : The return on a
bond taking account of the coupon cash flows and the  capital
gain or loss at redemption.
The types of bonds  include:
Callable and putable bonds. Callable bonds can be redeemed at the issuer’s discretion
prior to the specified  maturity  (redemption) date. Putable bonds can be sold back to the
to convert into some other asset on specified terms at a future date. Conversion is usually
Eurobonds . Eurobonds are bonds issued in a country other than that of the currency of
variations listed here. Eurobonds are issued by governments but more usually by
corporations.
Euro bonds. These a re bonds denominated in euros and issued in the euro currency area.
be euro eurobonds.
Floating rate notes (FRNs) . These are corporate bonds where the coupon can be a djusted
at pre -determined intervals. The adjustment will be made by reference to some benchmark
inflation rates.
Index -linked bonds. These are corporate bonds where the coupon can be adjusted to high
and variable rates of inflation. While other bonds have a maturity (redemption) value fixed
the value and the coupon of an index -linked bond are uprated each year in line  with lagged
changes in a specified price index.
Junk bonds.  Junk bonds are corporate bonds  whose issuers are regarded by bo nd credit
rating agencies as being of high risk. They will carry  a rate of interest at least 200 basis
points above that for the corresponding bonds  issued by high -quality borrowers.   59 Strips. Stripping refers to the breaking up of a bond into its component coupon payments
pays no interest but is sold at a discount to the payment that w ill eventually be  received. In
""
4.2. Bond market
4.2.1.  Bond market characteristics
Debt markets include:
Majority of world bond markets have different institutional arrangements for the issue and
trading of government bonds and corporate bonds. The reason is that governments should
market with high rated participants should be ensured. Therefore government bond
markets are subject to high level of supervision and regulation by  the central bank.
government bonds often serve as a benchmark for pricing other assets and they are also
frequently used as collateral in various financial transactions.
by debt securities issued by financial institutions (consisting of monetary financial
corporations. Monetary financial institutions include all financial instit utions whose
business is (1) to receive deposits and/or close substitutes for deposits from entities other
than MFIs and (2) to grant for their own account credit and/or invest in securities..
The non -government bond market is dominated by bank debt securi ties. This segment
bonds .
Concept
Covered bonds  are claims of the bond holders against the
issuing MFI that are secured by a pool of cover assets on the
public sector. .
The introduction of the euro in 1999 had a major impact on the operations of government -
debt managers as the disappearance of exchange rate risks within the euro area created the
secondary market. Governments have put great effort into making their outstanding debt
4.2.2.  Bond m arket  yields
liquidity.
Risk-averse investors demand a risk premium (term premium) for investments in long -
term bonds to compensate them for the risk of losses due  to interest rate hikes; those losses
spread of yields for bonds with longer maturity over yields for bonds with shorter
likely.
Liquidity is one of the key characteristics of the bond market.
Liquidity  is the ease with which an investor can sell or buy a bond immediately at a price
A liquid market  allows market participants to trade at low trading costs. Kyle ( 1985 )
identifies three dimensions of liquidity:
 tightness: the cost of turning around a position during a short period. Tightness in
essence refers to a low b id–ask spread;
 depth: a market is deep if only large buy or sell orders can have an impact on
prices;
The spread between the yield of a bond with liquidity and a similar bond with less liquidity
is referred to as the liquidity premium
Credit risk is the risk of loss because of the failure of a counterparty to perform according
between the yield of a particular bond and the yield of a bond with similar characteristics
.Credit risk  and liquidity premia  of euro -denominated bonds are typically calculated as
the spread of the bond yields over those of German government bonds. There are two
differential varies considerably over time. Pagano and Von Thadden ( 2008 ) discuss studies
differences in country -specific default risk or different sensitivities of bonds’ future
They state that credit risk explains a considerable portion of cross -country yield
differences but explains very little of their variation over time.
61 4.3. Bond valuation
4.3.1.  Discounted models
The fair value or fair price of a bond is based on the present value  of expected future cash
flows. The general formula for estimating the fair price of a bond is:
P = C/(1+r) +C/(1+r)2 + C/(1+r)3 +. . .+ C/(1 + r)n + B/(1+r)n
number of periods to maturity (redemption).
Example
Euro will be repaid at maturity. There are two years to
maturity and the next coupon is due in six months. The
redemption yield  on similar bonds is 6% p.a. Estimate the fair
price of the bond.
An interest rate of 6% p.a. indicates a rate of 3% per six -
month period.
all future cas h flows. The redemption yield of a bond could be viewed as an average of
discount rates applicable to the various future cash flows. The redemption yield indicates
the average annual return to be received by an investor holding a bond to maturity.
The rate  of discount is the required rate of return from a bond. The required rate of return
can be regarded as the sum of the yield on bonds that are free of default risk (government
bonds) and a risk premium to reflect the default risk of the bond being valued. High
default risk entails a high required rate of return and hence a high discount rate.
relationship to the risk of default. High interest rates and high risk are associated with low
prices.
An important distinction when considering bond prices is between the clean and dirty
require the price to include half the next coupon so that holding the bond for the previous
three months provides an interest yield. The rights to the coupon accumulated by the seller
are referred to as accrued interes t. The clean price of a bond excludes accrued interest
whereas the dirty price includes it.
Concept
Clean price - the price of a bond ignoring any interest which
may have accrued since the last coupon payment.
""
interest.   62 Quoted prices are usually clean prices  whereas the price to be paid is the dirty price .
Example
Assume it is 22 November 2010.Treasury 10% 2012 matures
on 21 November 2012. Calculate the fair price of this bond
when the re demption yield is 10% p.a. and 5% p.a.
Assume it is 22 November 2010.Treasury 5% 2012 matures
on 21 November 2012. Calculate the fair price of this bond
when the redemption yield is 10% p.a. and 5% p.a.
Assume it is 22 November 2010. A zero -coupon bond
matures on 21 November 2012. Calculate the fair price of this
bond when the redemption yield is 10% p.a. and 5% p.a.
months.
)
months.
A zero coupon bond pays no coupons. The only cash flow
receipt is the 100 Euro  at redemption.
The proportionate fall in the bond price re sulting from a rise in interest rates is less than
the proportionate rise in the bond price caused by a fall when the percentage point change
in interest rates is the same in the two cases.
This can be illustrated by reference to the case of a bond with no  maturity date.  The price
of such a bond is:
P = C/r
(required  rate of return). Consider the case of a 5 Euro annual coupon and an initial
interest rate of 10% p.a. Th e fair price of the bond would be estimated as:
to rise to:
to:
convexity.
estimate the fair price of the bond. The process could be reversed in order to find the
redemption yield of the bond know ing its current price and the future cash flows . The
redemption yield (y) can be obtained by solving equation  for y.
P =C/(1+y)1+C/(1+y)2+C/(1+y)3+C/(1+y)4+B/(1+y)4
The effective annual yield  takes account of the compounding. The effective annual yield
is given by: (1+ y)2-1 .
Realized compound yield is  the average compound rate of return actually obtained from
an investment. Realized compoun d yield is affected by yield on reinvested coupons.
The calculations of redemption yield assume that coupons are reinvested at the redemption
yield. The realized compound yield equals the redemption yield if coupons are reinvested
at the redemption yield a nd the bond is held to redemption. If the reinvestment rate for the
redemption yield.
compound yield will be less than the redemption yield. Bond duration and risk
There are two types of risk encountered by investors in bonds. There is price (or capital)
Reinvestment risk refers to the uncertainty of the interest rate at which coupons and
redemption sums can be invested. This causes uncertainty as to the final sum that will be
available at the end of an investment horizon.
""
4.3.2.  Bond price volatility
Bond price volatility is measured by duration. The duration measures include Macaulay’s
period of time to the receipt of cash flows. Each time period (to the receipt of a cash flow)
is weighted by the proportionate contribution of that cash flow to the fair price of  the bond.
Macaulay’s duration is transformed into modified duration by means of dividing it by
number of coupon payments per year.
price (fair price of the bond) arising from a unit proportional change in (1 + redemption
yield).
The corresponding interpretation of modified duration  is:
Modified duration = (ΔP/P) / Δ r
Δ (1+r) = Δ r.
replaced by r/n (the annual redemption yield divided by the number of coupon payments
per year).
The calculation of duration can be demonstrated by an example. Suppose that a bond has
interest rate is 10% p.a. for all maturities. The fair price of the bond is:
An interest rate of 10% p .a. is 5% per six -month period.
Macaulay’s  duration is calculated as the weighted average of the periods to the receipt of
cash flows. The weighting is based on the contribution of the period’s cash flow to the fair
Conversion of Macaulay’s duration to modified duration is made through division by
(1+r/n).
Example
A corporate bond pays an annual coupon of £10 and has four
years to maturity. It has just paid a coupon.  As a result of a
rises from 8% p.a. to 12% p.a. What are the effects  of this
the bond? (c) Discuss your results.
""
Example
reach maturity on 10 June 2012. It is now 11 June 2010.
duration of the bond.
""
Example
An investo r has two bonds. Bond A pays a 5 Euro  annual
coupon and matures in five years. Bond B pays a 4 Euro
coupon semi -annually and matures in three years. The
investor needs to sell one bond immediately and hold the
Which bond would the investor sell if that investor expected
65 4.3.3.  Behavior of Macaulay’s duration
Macaulay’s duration of a bond behavior can be summarized by a set of rules.
Rule 1: The duration of a zero coupon bond equals its time to maturity. Since a zero
average time to the receipt of cash flows equals the time to that payment.
related to the coupon.
maturity.
yield.
redemption yield. If a bond pays the same coupon each period forever without the
Example
A fund manager holds a 100 -million Euro bond portfolio
four years and accounts for 25 Euro million of the portfolio.
Bond B has a duration of seven years and accounts for 25
duration of ten years. What is duration of the portfolio ?
""
4.3.4.  Immunization
Bonds are used in institutional investment portfolios not only as means of accumulating
wealth but also as means of funding annuity payments. Since it is possible to obtain
reasonably reliable estimates of the duration of prospective annui ty payment streams as
degree of protection against interest rate risk.
Duration is also important for the structuring of bond index tracker funds. If such a fund
chara cteristics of a cell would be duration. Other characteristics might be redemption yield
and credit rating.
exhibits a duration that differs from the optimum it is possible to use bond futures to adjust
the portfolio duration to the desired value.
""
4.3.5.  Bond convexity
Duration provides just an approximation to the relationship between yield changes and
bond price movements. The analysis of the price/yield relationship for a bond together
that for small changes in yield it is sufficient.
66 Concept
Convexity  is a measure of the change in duration with
respect to changes in interest rates.
change. Duration underestimates price rises and overestimates falls. In both cases the new
bond price is underestimated. The inaccuracies arise because mo ney duration fails to take
account of the convexity (curvature) of the actual price/yield relationship of a bond.
While constructing bond portfolios a bond portfolio manager should be concerned with not
convexity. High convexity bonds provide this benefit to a greater extent than low
convexity bonds. The benefits of convexity are greater when interest rate changes are
relatively large. This implies that the portfolio manager needs to consider the prospective
size of interest rate movement as well as the direction.
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
Figure 10. Duration and convexity
accurate. The second derivative incorporates what has been called convexity:
duration and convexity approximation  give a low estimate of bond price.
""
Example
A bond has just paid a six -monthly coupon of 4 Euro. There
are four more coupons to be paid by maturity. How accurate
is modified duration for the purpose of estimating the e ffect y3 y2 y1
Initial
interest
rate  First & second
derivatives
First derivative
Interest rate  Price
e
2% p.a. Comment on the results of the calculations.
A bond with high convexity will tend to have a relatively low redemptio n yield . The
advantage from high convexity would be offset by a lower yield. If interest rate
should be chosen. If the expectation is that there will be a substantial interest rate
high duration bon ds).Convexity can be calculated and combined with measures of duration
when evaluating the potential effects of interest rate changes on bond prices. Since
correct ion is required in the case of large interest rate movements. To estimate the effects
estimate of convexity with an estimate of duration.
4.4. Bond analysis
4.4.1.  Inverse floaters  and floating rate notes
division of a conventional bond into an inverse floater and a floating rate note.
Inverse floater  is a bond whose interest rate is inversely r elated to a market rate. For
example an inverse floater might pay a coupon rate of 10% p.a. minus LIBOR (LIBOR is a
commonly used benchmark interest rate that reflects market rates).
The price of an inverse floater is extremely sensitive to interest rate m ovements. Not only
principal value are discounted also rises. There are two effects of interest rate rises that act
to reduce the bond price. Conversely interest rate  falls have two positive effects on the
bond price; the higher coupons are accompanied by a lower discount rate. So inverse
durations.  Inverse floaters are structured by dividing a conventional bond into an inverse
floater and a floating rate note.
Floating rate note  is a bond whose coupon rate moves in line with market rates. For
example the coupon rate on a floating rate note might be 2% p.a. plus EURIB OR. Since
changes tend to offset each other with the effect that there is little net effect on the bond
price. Floating rate notes exhibit low price volatility and hence short durations.
The high duration of inverse floaters renders them useful for hedging long -term liabilities.
increase in the value of the inverse floaters. Inverse fl oaters might be attractive to
assurance companies. Conversely floating rate notes could be attractive to institutions with
""
4.4.2.  Callable bonds
Some corporate bonds are callable . This means that the issuer has the right to repurchase
protection during which the original coupon is locked in (see Figure 11).
A rise in the bond price that makes the repurchase desirable would be brought about by a
fall in market interest rates or an improvement in the credit rating of the bonds. Under
these circumstances the issuer could repurchase the bonds and issue new bonds at a lower
coupon rate. The iss uer would choose to repurchase since that would allow for a reduction
in financing costs. Bonds with a relatively high coupon could be repurchased with money
raised from the sale of bonds with a lower coupon. The issuer thereby reduces coupon
payments.
The predetermined price at which the issuer has the right to repurchase puts an upper limit
on the value of the bonds. No one would pay a higher price knowing that that they could
be forced to sell at the predetermined price. The price/yield relationship for  a callable bond
has an upper limit to the price .
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
Figure 11. Callable bond
""
An implication of the u pper limit to the price is that  the convexity turns into concavity.
Another implication is that the coupon rate on a ca llable bond will be higher than the
coupon rate on a bond without the call feature. If investors face a ceiling on their
Effectively investors are providing the issuer with a call option. The investors would
require payment for the call option. The payment to the investors takes the form of
increased coupons.
bond and the callable bond. On the horizontal axis the figure shows the value of a
The left vertical axis shows the value of a call option for a callable bond with the same
Par
Issue
date Maturity  Noncallab le
but
redeemable  Freely callable
Time  Call price   69
""
""
The right vertical axis shows the price of noncallable and callable bonds with the same
figure. The value of the callable bond is equal to the value of the non callable bond minus
the call price.
""
4.4.3.  Converti ble bonds
Some corporate bonds may be convertible into common stock of the company at the option
of the bond holder. The bonds are usually callable at par plus a call premium. A
convertible bond is in the money if the stock value of the bond exceeds the call price. The
call feature is included to allow the company to force conversion into common stock.
Conversion can be forced only if the bond is in the money. Call of an out -of-the money
convertible induces the bondholders to turn in their bonds at the call p rice. Sometimes
voluntary conversion occurs if the convertible is in -the-money and the dividend yield on
the stock exceeds the current yield on the convertible.  Call option
Origin for left
axis 0 EV EV
EV
EV Intrinsic
value  Noncallable bond  Bond price
Option
value  EV = Excess value
Call
price
Par
Origin for
right axis  Value of
noncallable  Par      Call
bbbbb price  Callable
bond
price of the convertible. The stock value is initially below the par value and the stock value
is assumed to grow over time. The straight bond value gradually approaches  the par value
as the bond gets closer to maturity. The call price dec lines over time to the par value. As
value declines and the market price of the convertible approaches the stock value.
The market price of the convertible must be hig her than the higher of the straight bond
value or the stock value. Otherwise arbitrage occurs.
evidence supports the view that convertibles are issued when the management has negative
information.
""
Figure 13. Convertible bonds
""
4.5. Summary
the ways in which bonds differ from shares is in the relative certainty of future cash flows.
known with certainty. This is in contrast to shares sin ce shares typically have dividend
influences the pricing and analysis of bonds. The fair price of a bond is estimated using a
characteristics  are future bond yields and of bond price volatility (risk).
The debt markets are used by both firms and gov ernments to raise funds for long -term
Convertible
bbbprice
Call price
Straight bond value
Maturity time  Issue date  Par $  71 governments can issue corporate bonds of various types of shares. Bonds usually pay a
fixed rate of interest at pre -determined interv als. Bonds are traded on a stock exchange and
their price fluctuates in response to supply and demand. In the short run the supply of both
is fixed and price fluctuations are therefore the result of changes in demand.
""
Key terms
 Callable bond
 Convertible bond
 Redemption yield
 Duration
 Convexity
""
Further readings
1454.
518.
Occasional Paper No. 25.
""
Review questions and problems
""
1. Why does the calculation of a ‘present value’ of a bond involve discounting?
 Which of the followi ng would be likely to show the greatest short -run price
 Give two reasons why institutions like banks prefer to hold short -term rather
than long -term bonds.
 Are high yield  bonds good investments? Why or why not?   72  Assume a redemption yield of 8%. Compute the duration for the following
bonds each 100 Euro par value. For the 12% coupon bond compute duration.
 In problem 7 assume that yields change from 8 to 9 %. Work out the exact
change in price and compare it with the change in price predicted by duration.
Explain the difference. Assume 100 Euro par value.
 Compute the duration of a portfolio compo sed of equal proportions of a ten
to maturity.
 A firm has decided immediately to refund existing callable bond issue. Under
what circumstances is there an immediate benefit to refun ding? What does that
benefit depend upon?
 How can callable bonds be substitutes for short -term bonds?
 A firm has a perpetual callable bond outstanding with a par value of 100 Euro
and an annual coupon of 14 Euro. The firm can refund this with a new
noncall able perpetual bond having an 8 percent coupon. The call price on the
old bond issue is 114 Euro. Flotation costs for a new issue are 2 percent of par
value. What is the myopic benefit of refunding?
""
73 5. EQUITY  MARKET
""
Mini contents   Equity instruments
 The pu rpose and functions of stock exchanges.
 The distinction between primary and secondary markets.
 Types of stock exchange.
 Stock market trading systems.
 Bid-offer spreads.
 Types of purchase and sale order.
 Processes by which shares are issued.
""
Equity market  is one of the key sectors of financial markets where long -term financial
instruments are traded. The purpose of equity instruments issued by corporations is to raise
funds for the firms. The provider of the funds is granted a residual claim on the company ’s
For market participants equity securities mean holding wealth as well as a source of new
economy.
The purpose of eq uity is the following:
 A new issue of equity shares is an important source of external corporate financing;
 Equity shares perform a financing role from internally generated funds (retained
earnings);
 Equity shares perform an institutional role as a means o f ownership.
Within the savings -investment process magnitude of retained earnings exceeds that of the
news stock issues and constitutes the main source of funds for the firms. Equity
instruments can be traded publicly and privately.
External financing thro ugh equity instruments is determined by the following financial
factors:
 The degree of availability of internal financing within total financing needs of the
firm;
 The cost of available alternative financing sources;
equity investments.
Internal equity financing of companies is provided through retained earnings. When
internally generated financing is scarce due to low levels of profitability and retained
companies turn to look for external financing sources. Firms may raise funds by issuing
equity that grants the investor a residual claim on the company’s income.
possibility to attract larger magnitude of funds from the market players.
Check Question  What is the purpose of equity?
""
Equity markets  are markets which organize trading nationally an d internationally in such
instruments.
Concept  Bourse  – a French term often used to refer to stock market.
""
""
5.1. Equity instruments
5.1.1.  Common shares
Common (ordinary) shares  repre sent partial ownership of the company and provide their
entitled to a share only in th ose profits which remain after bondholders and preference
any remaining assets only after prior claimants have been paid. Therefore common
shareholders face larger risk s than other stakeholders of the company (e.g. bondholders
guaranteed interest o f bondholders.
Concept
Common or ordinary share (stock) – an equity share that
does not have a fixed dividend yield.
The variability of returns to shareholders  is affected by the proportion of debt to equity
financing (called the debt to equity ratio) o f the company. The higher the proportion of
over which the net profit is to be distributed. When earned profits exceed the level
reduction in payments is borne by the company shareholders. The higher is the debt to
common shares in ‘highly leveraged’ companies are usually regarded as riskier than those
in ‘low leveraged’ companies.
capital structure . Usually expressed as the ratio of debt to
The law requires that the company provides the owners with specified information in the
annual report and accounts and that the firm must hold an annual general m eeting at which
whom has a number of votes matching the size of his shareholding.
dividends are taxed. Thus the tax shield of debt forms incentives to finance
company by debt.
insolvency and may cause distress as well as lead to bankruptcy. Thus companies
tend to minimise their credit risk and increase the portion of equity in the capital
structure.
between debt hold ers and equity holders. Shareholders have incentives to
case of optimistic outcomes. Their incentives are mainly based by limited liability
spite of their priority claims towards company assets.
is overvalued.
Check Question
Why does financial distress increase agency conflicts
between equity holders and debt holders?
""
5.1.2.  Preferred shares
and which usually does not allow for voting rights of its owners. Typically the investor
into it is only entitled to receive a fixed contractual amount of dividends and this make this
payment is only made after payments to the investors in the firm’s debt instruments are
satisfied. Therefore it is call a hybrid instrument.
Technically preferred shareholders share ownership of the firm with common shareholders
pay dividends without the risk of bankruptcy.  Because preferred stockholders typically are
instrument .
Concept
predetermined constant dividend payment.
Preferred stock investments may have tax advantage  to instit utional investors.
preferred share dividend payments (current and from previous periods) dividend payments
on common shares. Usually owners of preferred shares do not partic ipate in the net profit
of the company in excess to the stated fixed annual dividend.
raise new capital before all preferred dividends are paid. Investors may be unwilling to
make new investments before the company is able to compensate its existing equity
investors.   76 Preferred stock is an attractive source of financing for highly leveraged companies. Equity
markets offer a variety of innovations in preferred shares issues. These varieties include:
 cumulative preference shares
 non-cumulative preference shares
 irredeemable
 redeemable preference shares
 convertible preference shares
 participating preference shares
 stepped preference shares.
Non-cumulative p referred shares  do not have an obligation to pay any missed past
A redeemable preferred share  has a maturity date on which the original sum invested is
dividends forever and never repay the principal sum). Some redeemable preference shares
provide the issuer with the right to redeem at a predetermined price without the obligation
would be paid for by means of a higher dividend for the investors.
Convertible preferred shares  give the holder the right to convert preference shares into
ordinary shares at a predetermined rate; the investor pays nothing to convert apart from
surrendering the convertible preference shares. In some cases the right to convert arises
only in the event of a failure to pay dividends.
Participating preferred shares  allow the issuing company to in crease the dividends if
profits are particularly high; the preference share dividend can exceed the fixed level if the
dividend on ordinary shares is greater than a specified amount.
Stepped preferred shares  pay a dividend that increases in a predetermine d way.
Specific  adjustable rate preferred shares  are attractive in increasing interest
environment. If the dividend is reset each quarter according to a pre -established formula
Auction rate preferred shares (ARPS)  or Single point adjustable  rate shares (ARPS)
reset dividend periodically using Dutch auction method. The reset date can be as frequent
significantly lower yields.
participating in the auction submitting a bid for the stock by
specified deadline. The bid prices are ranked and minimum
price for selling of shares is determined. All bids equal or
minimum price are rejected.
""
Preferred equity redemption cumulative stocks (PERCS)  are shares that pay dividends
and are automatically converted into common stock at a conversion price and date. These  77 can be callable at any date after the issuance for price above the issue price (e.g. by 40%)
and gradually declines as the conversion date approaches.
Check Question
Why does financial distress increase agency conflicts
between equity holders and debt holders?
""
5.1.3.  Private equity
and may be extended to total wealth of private owners. It is used mainly by small and
companies may be feasible only if it has a significant sha reholder base to support an active
such companies attempt to raise additional capital from wealthy individual or institutional
and is slowly gaining ground in European countries.
The most important sources of private equity investments come from venture capital
willing to maintain the investment for a long -term period (5 -10 years). Venture capital
market brings together private businesses that need equity finan cing and venture capitalists
(business angels) that can provide funding. Venture capital fund identifies potential of the
The invested funds are not withdrawn before a set deadline. Common exit strategies are
out if the company is acquired by another firm.
Private equity funds  pool resources of their partners to fund most ofte n new business
strategies are similar to the ones used by venture capital funds.
provided by banks or other financial intermediaries.   78 Check Question  Why does financial distress increase agency conflicts
between equity holders and debt holders?
""
5.1.4.  Global shares and American Depository Receipts (ADR)
exchange traded funds (ETFs).
Direct purchase s of foreign shares can be limited due to limited access to the stock
brokerage companies.
Shares in international funds (International mutual funds (IMFs))  offer pos sibility of
financial institutions. Thus individual investors may get access and diversify across
international stocks. IMFs can be specializing on specific country or a cross several
countries or regions.
international ETF is determined by translating foreign currency value of the foreign
securities into dollars.
securities that mak e up the index are denominated in non -US currencies. Thus the return
on ETF will be influenced by the movement of the country’s currency against dollar. If the
the index as measured in dollars. This is also true for IMFs.
Check Question
What are advantages and disadvantages for investing into
exchange traded funds (ETFs) and  international investment
funds?
American Depository Receipts (ADR)  is an arrangement under which foreign shares are
In this way the shares of a foreign company is admi tted to the well developed stock
denominated in terms of foreign issuer’s home currency.
ADR may represent a combination of several foreign shares (e.g. lots of 100 shares).
Trading takes place in negotiable certificates representing ownership of shares of the
company.
Concept
American Depository Receipts (ADR)  – a certificate of
ownership iss ued by a US bank to promote local trading on a
foreign stock. US bank holds foreign shares and issues ADRs
against them.
ADR .
Such shares can be registered within the securities exchange commission and comply with
""
Table 5. Comparison of equity instruments
Instrument  Types  Characteristics  Investors  Market
Common
shares  Common
Puttable common
ADRs
GDRs  Corporate
ownership
""
financial
non-financial
individual
investors  Stock
exchange
Preferred
shares  cumulative
non-cumulative
redeemable
convertible
participating
stepped preference
shares.
Features of
Callability  Financial
non-financial
individual
investors  Preferred stock
market /
stock exchange
Private
equity  Venture capital
fund shares
Private equity fund
shares
Private
investments of
Partnerships or
private limited
form of
companies  Venture capital
institutional
individual
investors
(busines s angels)  Private equity
market
""
""
""
Advantages  of ADRs include
 easy and direct access to funding in the foreign market;   80  building company name recognition in the foreign country;
 reliable quoting of share prices;
 close following by investment analysts.
Disadvantages  of ADRs:
 A costly investment alternative;
 For large institutional investors vs small retail investors differences in prices and
return;
 Market for ADRs can be illiquid;
 Multiple listing can result in share price differences in various markets g lobally.
Global Depository Receipts (GDRs) are negotiable receipts issued by financial institutions
in developed countries against shares of foreign companies. GDRs can be simultaneously
issued in US and Europe.
Financial institution collects and distribu tes dividends paid by the foreign firm to the GDR
(also ADR) investor. Thus financial institutions facilitate access to world equity markets
by intermediating between world investors and companies in developing and transition
countries.
Check Question
What are advantages and disadvantages of issuing American
Depository Receipts and Global Depository Receipts to
issuing companies and to investors?
""
5.2. Primary equity market
Equity can be issued either privately (unquoted shares) or publicly via shares that are listed
on a stock exchange (quoted shares).
Public market  offering of new issues typically involves the use of an investment bank in a
Private placement market  includes securities which are sold directly to investors and are
not registered with the securities exchange commission. There are different regulatory
requirements for such securities.
In general private placement market is viewed as illiquid. Such a lack of liquidity  means
that buyers of shares may demand a premium to compensate for this unappealing feature
of a security.
""
5.2.1.  Primary public market
in offering of shares and is includ ed in a listing on a stock exchange for the first time. It
allows the company to raise funds from the public.
Process of going public . The issuing company has to develop a prospectus with detailed
investors for making decision in buying large blocks of shares. The prospectus is
registered within and approved by the securities exchange commission. Afterwards the
order to present the company.
Concept
Road show  – travelling of company managers through
various cities and making presentations for large institutional
investors.
sometimes avoid paying a fee to underwr iters by using the deep discount route. In a rights
falling below the sale price of the new shares.
Concept
To underwrite – an act of guaranteeing a specific pric e to
the issuer of the security.
Lead underwriter  – key investment bank withinn a group of
investment banking firms that are required to underwrite a
portion of a corporation’s newly issued shares.
The deep discount method prices the new shares at such a low level that the market price is
extremely unlikely to fall so far.
prevailing market and industry conditions. During the road show the lead underwriter is
shares by investors at various possible offer prices.
IPO factors.  Public equity markets play a limited role as a source of new funds for listed
retained earnings) to external financing. Myers and Majluf (1984) have introduced the
is issued only as a last resort. Statistics on company sources of financing support this view.
decrease in net issuance of public equity. A large number of the issues in the late 1990s
sector.
Exercise
""
A one for four rights issue assumes offering one new share
for every four held. A one for four rights issue may be at 160
Euro when the current share price is 200 Euro. The cost of:
4 shares each 200 Euro equal to  800 Euro
1 right each 160 Euro eq uals to  160 Euro
price to fall by
200 Euro – 192 Euro = 8 Euro.
Among other factors the economic cycle is considered to play a significant role  in a
company’s decision to issue public equity. Equity is often used to finance long -term
of equity issuance with investor sentiment. Developments in investor opti mism over time
the shares of a target company. Therefore merger an d acquisition (M&A) cycles can also
be expected to correlate with equity issuance activity.
There are important  advantages and disadvantages of initial public offerings (IPOs).
Advantages of IPOs :
 Possibility to obtain funds to finance investment.
 The p rice of a company’s shares acts as a measure of the company’s value.
 Increases of company financial independence (e.g. from banks) due to listing of a
company’s shares on a stock exchange.
 Possibility to diversify investments of current company owners by selling stakes in the
company in a liquid market.
 Increased recognition of the company name.
 Improved company transparency.
 A disciplining mechanism for managers.
Disadvantages of IPOs :
 High costs due to disclosure requirements.
 Risk of wider dispersed ownership.
 Separation of ownership and control which causes ‘agency problems’.
 Divergence of managers’ and outside investors’ interests.
 Information asymmetry problems be tween old and new shareholders.
 Risk of new shareholders focusing on short -term results.
""
Exercise
can sell the right. The price could be around 192 Euro – 160
for 160 Euro when they are prospectively worth 192 Euro.
A one for one rights issue may be used.
1 share each 200 Euro equal to  200 Euro   83 1 right each 40 Euro equals to  40 Euro
discounted price an investor could sell the rights. In the one
120 Euro – 40 Euro = 80 Euro
Note that the one for four rights issue at 160 Euro would raise
the same amount of money as the one for one rights issue at
40 Euro (the latter involves selling four times the number of
shares at a quarter of the price).
IPO market has received negative publicity due to several problems:
corporate executives. Bankers’ expectations are to get future contracts from the same
company.
place the first day b ids for the shares that are above the offer price. This helps to build the
price upwards. Some investors are willing to participate to ensure that the brokers will
reserve some shares of the next hot IPO for them.
Excessive commissions . These are charged b y some brokers when the demand for an IPO
is high. Investors are willing to pay the commissions if they can recover the costs from the
below the market value.
The literature contains strong evidence that IPOs on average perform poorly over a period
of a year or more. Thus from a long term perspective many IPOs are overpriced. Since
Check Question
Why IPO is often underpriced?
""
Check Question
What are advantages and disadvantages of IPOs to issuing
companies and investors?
""
5.3. Secondary equity m arket
capital is raised and the issuer of the security does not benefit directly from the sale.
Secondary markets are also classified into organized stock exchanges  and over-the-
counter (OTC) markets .
national stock markets. The most important differences are in the trading procedures.
their clients.   84 Securities’ trading in the secondary market form the means by which stocks or bonds
bought in the primary market c an be converted into cash. The knowledge that assets
purchased in the primary market can easily and cheaply be resold in the secondary market
makes investors more prepared to provide borrowers with funds by buying in the primary
market. Effective secondary  market is an important basis of successful primary market.
If transaction costs are high in the secondary market the proceeds from the sale of
Also high transaction  costs in the secondary market might tend to reduce the volume of
trading and thereby reduce the ease with which secondary market sales can be executed.
Therefore high transaction costs in the secondary market could reduce primary market
asset liquidity. I n consequence there can be adverse effects on the level of activity in the
primary market and hence on the total level of investment in the economy.
""
5.3.1.  Organized exchanges
derivatives.
in a stock exchange trading list . The list is formed of in struments that satisfy the
stock exchange specifies the set of requirements.
Advantages  of listing  on the stock exchange to the corporation and its shareholders are:
 The ability to sell shares on the stock exchange makes people more willing to
invest in the company.
 Investors may accept a lower return on the shares and the company c an raise
capital more cheaply.
valuation of a company.
the company.
shares on the stock market.
 The increased transparency may reduce the cost of capital.
 Listing on the stock exchange is costly for the company.
prepared according to IFRS financial statements.
competition and in takeover cases.
Stock market deale rs and brokers  fulfill specific functions at the equity market. Dealers
matchi ng of buyers and sellers for a specific fee.
Concept
Dealer  – an agent who buys and sells securities as a principal
experience loss of value of stock inventory. This forms the primary risk for the dealer.
Concept
Broker  – an agent who executes orders to buy and sell
securities on behalf of his clients in exchange for a
commission fee.
In order to profit from different price movements directions dealers make positioning .
position . In a short sale the security is borrowed and sold in the expe ctation of
buying this security back later at a lower price. The investor tries to sell high and
any cash dividends to the lender of the security. This rule is related to the amount
of drop in stock prices by approximately the after -tax amount of a cash dividend
after the dividend payment date. Stock exchanges apply downstick restrictions on
short sales in order to prevent from panic selling and driving stock prices sharply
down.
well as securities exchange commissions to impose the specific regulations in order to
prevent this type of price manipulations.
Concept
the seller at the time of trade.
Securi ty dealers are heavily levered . Typically the dealer’s equity forms a small
percentage of the market value of his inventory. Most dealers financing is in the form of
debt (e.g. bank loan). Majority of dealer debt financing is in the form of repurchase
There are several types of stock exchange members :
 Commission brokers  – who execute buy and sell orders for the public for the fee.
buyers of financial securities. They may find the best price for someone who
wishes to buy or sell securities.
shares. These brokers break round lots (a multiple of 100 shar es) into odd -lots and
vise versa for a fee.
 Registered trader  – who owns a seat on a stock exchange and trades on his own
exchange.
 Specialists  – who are market makers for individual securities listed on an
organized stock exchange. Their purpose is to reduce variability of the securities
of buyers to keep the prices from falling for a period. When there are too many buy
rise in prices.
 Issuing  intermediary  - who undertakes to is sue new securities on behalf of a
borrower. An issuing house acts as an agent for the borrower in financial markets.
This task is usually carried out by investment banks
 Market -maker is an intermediary who holds stock of securities and quotes a price
at wh ich each of the securities may be bought and sold. Market -making is usually
performed by the securities  divisions of the major banks
 Arbitrageur - who buys and sells financial assets in order to make a profit from
pricing anomalies. Anomalies occur when th e same asset is priced differently in
two markets at the same time. Since financial markets are well informed and highly
different from speculation.
 Hedger  - who buys or sells a financial asset to avoid risk of devaluation of
Concept
Arbitrage  – is the simultaneous purchase of a n undervalued
asset or portfolio and sale of an overvalued but equivalent
price differential. It takes advantage of market inefficiencies
in a risk -free manner.
Stock exchanges set quite high  commissions  for all member firms. The competition from
larger transactions.
Majority of transactions at the stock exchanges are fully automated . Small buy and
sell orders are matched by computers.
""
5.3.2.  Over -the-counter (OTC) market
make markets in individual securities. Common equity shares that are traded on it can be
listed and unlisted shares.
""
Concept
Over -the-counter (OTC) market – a market for securi ties
trading usually takes place by electronic means.
Two large segments of OTC markets  can be distinguished:   87  Unorganized OTC markets  with unregulated trading taking place between
individuals. Typic ally these markets do not restrict possibilities to buy and sell
outside of organized exchanges.
specific company shares. Examples of organized over -the-counter markets are the
NASDAQ and upstairs markets in the United States. Trading takes place via a
computer network. Market makers display the prices at which they are prepared to
brokers. The upstairs m arket  is mainly used by institutional investors and handles
who an attempt to find a transaction counterparty. In the absence of such a
""
5.3.3.  Electronic stock markets
Since the middle of 1990s a number of electronic stock markets were created for
disclosing and executing stock transactions electronically. While publicly displaying buy
investors mainly. Registered and regulated electronic stock exchanges developed from
electronic communication networks (ECN). Some electronic communication networks
(ECNs) exist along  with official exchanges.
Concept
Electronic communication networks  – order -driven trading
role.
The popularity of ECNs stems from the possibility to execute security trade orders
efficiently. Th ey may allow complete access to orders placed on other organized or
exclusively to most important clients. As a result quote spreads between the bid and ask
prices ar e reduced.
Since ECNs can execute orders of stocks listed and traded on organized or other electronic
trading system).
As an alternative to organized stock exchanges  the so called alternative trading systems
order to conduct a transaction between two parties. In fact the services of a broker or a
dealer are not required to execute a trade. The direct trading of stocks between two
customers without the use of a broker or an exchange  is called an ATS.
There are two types of alternative trading systems  (ATS) :
 crossing networks;
 dark pools.
Electronic crossing networks  do not display quotes but match large buy and sell orders of
are batch processors that aggregate orders for execution. Market orders are crossed once or
order information that can be entered by the subscriber and the amount of pretrade
transparency that is available to partici pants. An example of an electronic crossing
network is POSIT.
Concept
Electronic crossing networks  – order -driven trading
system.
important advantages for large orders of institutional investors. They are specifically
designed to minimize market impact trading costs.
session time to execute the orders and an offsetting order entered by other market
are basing their trades.
exchange and provide for a neutral gathering place at the same time. Their participa nts
anonymous (“dark”) source of liquidity.
Dark pools are electronic execution systems that do not display quotes but execute
transactions at externally provided prices. Buyers and sellers must submit a willingness to
transact at this externally provided price in order to complete a trade.
The key advantage of dark pools systems is that they are designed to prevent information
leakage and offer access to undisclos ed liquidity.
simultaneous buying and selling of a large portfolio of high rated stocks with a significant
aggregate value. Another understanding of programme trading refers t o the use of
orders to many trading posts at the exchange. Program trading is used to reduce the
The critics of program trading state that it is one of the major reasons for decline or rise in
by 2 percent) from the closing index on the previous trading day. When the collars are
“downtick”). Such restrictions are supposed to half stab ilizing effect on the market.
""
5.4. Secondary equity market structure
Secondary markets are characterized based on the trading procedures.   89 5.4.1.  Cash vs forward markets
Cash markets are markets where stocks are traded on a cash basis and transactions have
to be set tled within a specified few days period. Typical period is three days after the
transaction.
In order to increase the number of trades most cash markets allow margin trading.
Margin trading  allows the investor to borrow money or shares from a broker to fi nance the
transaction.
remains at this value in spite of market price changes by the settlement time. In order to
speculation. Some cash markets provide  institutionalized procedures to allow investors to
""
5.4.2.  Continuous markets and auction markets
Continuous markets  are markets where transactions take place all day and market makers
are ensuring market liquidity at moment.
Deal er market  is the market in which dealers publicly post bid and ask prices
a specific transaction volume. Investors are addressing the dealers offering the best price
(quote).
Auction market  is a market in which the supply and demand of securities are matched
directly and the price is formed as an equilibrium price.
In a call auction  market all orders are put into an order book until an auction and are
executed at a single price. Liquidity requires that such trades take place one or several
times during a day. Such trading procedures are aim ed at defining the auction price that
maximizes the trading volume.
Concept
Call auction  – a method of determining the market price of a
sellers. Such price fixing  takes place periodically each da y at
defined time.
""
5.4.3.  Order -driven markets and quote -driven markets
The mechanism by which buyers and sellers interact to determine price and quantity of
securities in the trade is called market structure.
There are two overall market structures for tradin g financial instruments:
 order driven and
 quote driven.   90 Order -driven market structure  allows buyers and seller orders submit their orders
are matched and the tra nsaction is executed.
Concept
Order - driven market  – a market without active market
other. An auction market .
takes place at the specified time. This type of auction is widely used for initial public
offerings of equity (and new issues of government debt). The call ma rket mechanism has
instructions (‘orders’) to buy or sell to brokers.
Typically order -driven trading systems are computerized. If not all orders at a price can be
as the auction rules for matching trades have to be specified in great detail to ensure  an
orderly and fair trading process.
Advances in information technologies have supported the development of order -driven
with fast computers (hardware) allows an  almost instantaneous matching of orders.
order book. A new arriving order is immedia tely matched with the previously submitted
orders from the order book. The trader can view all submitted orders and foresee what
trades will be executed if a new order is entered. The highest limit order and the lowest
limit order are in fact the bid and a sk prices of the market. One of the examples of trading
prices at which the public market participants are trading. Market makers provide a bid
quote (to buy) and an ask quote (to sell).  Market makers or dealers earn profit from the
spread between the two quotes and the turnover of the shares.
Concept
Quote -driven market  – a market in which dealers (market
makers) adjust their quotes continuously to reflect supply and
demand. This is a dealer market. Also called price -driven
market .
Anyone who wants to trade in a quote -driven market must trade with a dealer. Either the
investors negotiate wi th the dealers themselves or their brokers negotiate with the dealers.
publishing the dealers’ price quotations and for regulating the conduct of dealers. Stock
exchang es usually provide the dealers or market makers with privileged access to certain
to make trades of up to specified volumes.
generated.
91 5.4.4.  Hybrid markets
driven and order -driven market structures.
A market that integrates traditional floor tra ding with electronic auction trading has been
trading system with a centralised electronic order book. Euronext also enables small and
medium -sized listed companies to hire a d esignated market maker to act as ‘liquidity
provider’ in their stock. London Stock Exchange combines electronic order -driven trading
with liquidity provision by market makers.
Market structures are often compared from the point of view of their transparen cy and
liquidity.  In spite of expectations of the same market prices both in quote -driven and
with some delay (to allow dealers some time to off -load large trades in the market). As a
Liquidity can be also different. Investors can trade immediately in continuous order -driven
may prefer to negotiate price individually with dealers in quote -driven markets. In quote -
driven markets information about transactions may be delayed also.
""
5.5. Equity market transactions
5.5.1.  Bid-ask spread
he/she is prep ared to sell – the offer price – and a price at which he/she is willing to buy –
the bid price. In the transaction t he buyer pays the ask price and the seller receives the bid
price. The ask price is always above the bid price.
Concept
Ask price  – the pr ice at which market maker is willing to sell
a security. Also called an offer price .
""
Concept
Bid price  – the price at which market maker is willing to buy
a security.
The difference is called the bid –ask spread and is the profit of the dealer :
Spread  =  ask price – bid price.
The market bid -ask spread is the excess of the lowest ask price over the highest bid price
and is normally smaller than the spreads of individual market -makers.
""
Concept
Bid - ask spread  – the difference between the quoted bid and
ask prices.
""
If investor purchases the share and then immed iately sells it
The bid -ask spread of dealer can be seen as the price to be paid by investors for his
compensation for his costs and risks. The dealer typically holds an inventory of securities
are in the inventory).
important services:
for a counterparty to emerge.
 maintenance of price stability in the absence of corresponding sell or buy orders.
The dealer costs include the administrative costs of transferring shares.
The dealer risks arise from price fluctuations and information -based investors.
for such shares tend to be relatively high.
Dealer risk is also related to the possibility of investors possessing information that the
dealer does not. Such investors are able to make profit at the expense of the dealer.
fall of share price. As a result the dealer may suffer the loss from a fall in the share price.
The bid -offer spread is to provide the dealer with compensation for bearing this kind of
information ris k.
Dealers have a possibility to negotiate special prices for large transactions. The spread can
such block trades before the dealer can sell on (or buy) the bou ght (sold) securities to
(from) other dealers in the market.
Thus the spread is influenced by the following factors:
recording transactions;
 inventory costs – include the cost s of maintaining an inventory of particular shares;
higher spread is set.
Several research studies showed that bid -ask spreads on specific large stock exchanges are
margins wide. Some analysts called this phenomenon “under -the-table -payment” for order
not receive the best price for their quotes.
Concept  Order flow  – the right to execute customers’ trades.
""
""
5.5.2.  Placing order
An investor who wants to buy shares on a stock exchange has a possibility to submit
different types of orders through a broker.
Market order  is the simp lest and most common. It requires that the shares should be
traded at the most favorable price available. The most favorable price is the lowest
then takes place at a price that is currently available in the market.
Concept
Market order  – an order to buy or sell a security
immediately at the best obtainable price.
Limit order places a limit on the price at which shares can be bought or sold. Thus it
respectively.
automatic trade matching. However in practice some possibility in setting the pri ority of
orders remains. Limit orders remain on the limit order book until they are withdrawn by
Concept
Limit order  – an order to buy or sell a security at a specified
order.
Specific types of orders include:
 Market -if-touched order  becomes a market order if the share price reaches a
particular level. It is diffe rent from a limit order as there is no upper limit to the
specified price is not necessarily obtained.
 Stop order  is also an order that becomes a market order if there is a trade in the
market at a particular price. However it involves selling of shares after the price
too high.
""
Example
A broker is intending to by company X shares. He can ac cess
the central limit order book directly on the internet. The
following information sell orders (limit prices) and buy
orders (ask prices) is provided.
Sell orders                                                  Buy orders
Quantity              Lim its                     Limits             Quantity
1000                         58                          49                    2000
3000                         54                          48                      500
1000                         52                          47                    1000
1000                         51                          46                    2000
1000                         50                          44                  10000
A broker has an order to buy 1000 shares  and enter a market
order to buy those shares. A market order will be executed
against a best matching order. At what price will he buys the
shares?
Another dimension to an order is the length of time for which it remains in force.
 Fill-or-kill order  is to be cancelled if it cannot be executed immediately.
cancelled by the investor.
""
Example
Company X shares is traded at one of European stock
exchanges and its last transa ction has been at 40 Euro per
share. An investor entered a limit order to sell the shares at 41
Euro while the market price was still 40 Euro.
Company X shares are also traded on NASDAQ as an ADR.
One ADR represents one fourth of the share (4 ADRs equal 1
Suppose favourable information is disclosed to the market
Who are the parties exposed to losses at the European stock
exchange and on NAS DAQ if they do not react immediately?
""
""
""
Example
Market orders for a company X shares have been entered on a
crossing network for Europ ean shares. There is one order
participant V to sell 40000 shares. Assume that the orders
were entered in a chronological order and that the networ k
gives priority to the oldest orders. At the time specified for
30 Euro on their primary market.
What trades would take place on a crossing network?
means that the whole block has to be traded at the same price.
What trades would take place?
""
5.5.3.  Margin trading
Investors can borrow cash to buy securities and use the securities themselves as collateral.
A transaction in which an investor bor rows to buy shares using the shares themselves as
collateral is called margin trading  or buying on margin .
Concept
Margin trading  – an arrangement in which an investor
borrows money or shares from a broker to finance a
transaction.
borrows from a bank. The interest rate that bank charges broker for funds for this purpose
is called the broker call  rate or call money rate . The broker charges the borrowing
investor t he call money rate plus a service charge.
lend more than a specified percentage of the market value of the securities. The aim of
margin requirement is to discourage excess ive speculation and ensure greater stability in
the markets. Margin requirement has to ensure that investors can cover their position in
case the value of their investments into shares reduces. In such a away the possibility of
default on broker loans shou ld be reduced.
which is called a margin account. The initial deposit of cash is called initial margin .
Concept
Margin deposit – the amount of cash or securities that must
be deposited as guarantee on a futures position. The margin is
a returnable deposit
remainder is borrowed from the broker.
Example
Assume an investor buys 200 shares of a stock at 30 Euro per
share for 6000 Euro of stock on 50% margin and the
maintenance margin is 30%. By purchasing 6000 Euro of a
cash (or other equity) and so borrows 3000 Euro. The
equity level up to 30%.
regulation rules establish a maintenance margin requirement . This is the minimum
proportion of the equity in the investor’s margin account to the total market value.
Concept
Maintenance margin – the minimum margin tha t an investor
must keep on deposit in a margin account at all times.
""
Example
Consider a margin example for a short position. An investor
shorts (borrows and sells) 200 shares of a stock at 30 Euro for
a total stock value of 6000 Euro. With an initial ma rgin of
leaving the 6000 Euro from the sale in the account). This
leaves the investor with a balance of 9000 Euro (which does
not change with the stock price since it is in cash).
current market price. Assuming the maintenance margin is
worth 6923 Euro or 30% of the market value of the position
(2077 Euro / 6923 Euro) and additional  margin must be
posted.
The use of borrowed funds for investments into shares can magnify the returns on the
""
Exercise
""
Assume investor X has 59500 Euro to invest and is
Euro per share. With his 59500 Euro investor X can buy 1000
shares (ignoring commissions). Suppose investor’s X broker
can arrange for him to borrow an additional 59500 Euro so
that investor X can b uy an additional 1000 shares. Thus by
shares. The 2000 shares will be used as collateral for the
interest on the amount borrowed.
associated with a price change of 2 000 shares of the
corporation rather than 1 000 shares. He will benefit if the
price rises but will be worse off if the price falls (compared to
borrowing no funds).
investor X will lose 7 Euro per share on  2000 shares instead
of 7 Euro per share on just 1000 shares.
The return from the investment into securities is influenced by the proportion of the
investment that comes from borrowed funds.
The return on stock purchased on margin is defined:
r = (SP – INV – L + D ) / INV
Example
Assume investor decides to purchase on margin company
Annual dividend is 3 Euro per share. The investor pays 30
Euro per share in cash and borrows the remaining amount
from a broker a t 10% interest p.a. After a year the share is
sold in the market at 90 Euro per share.
The return for the investor is equal:
r = (90 – 30 – 33 + 3 ) / 30 = 100%
""
If the investor’s margin account falls below the minimum maintenance margin (which
The investor r eceives a margin call  from the broker specifying the additional cash to be
the broker has the authority to sell the securities for the investor’s account. Because of
sufficient cash to transfer in order to reach required maintenance margin. Such sales place
additional downward pressure on share prices and magnify the negative effect in the
market.
""
5.5.4.  Short selling
at the time of sale. Investors sell the stock short (or short the stock) when they expect
decline of the stock price.
fact that their shares were borrowed.
If the stock price declines by the time the short -seller purchases it in the market in order to
difference betwe en the initial selling price and the subsequent purchase price of the stock.
borrowed th e stock.
short -seller to pay a higher price for the stock than the price at which it was initially sold.
Stock markets and financial analysts provide information on l evel of short sale. Several
indicators are used to measure the short position on stock:
 a degree of short positions.  It is a ratio of the number of shares that are currently
number of investors expect the stock price to decline.
 Short interest ratio for specific shar es. It is the number of shares which are
believe that the stock price is currently overvalued. For some stock this ratio may
exceed 100 at particular points in time.
short sell ing activity in the market overall.
limit their losses.
""
""
5.5.5.  Stock trading regulations
Stock market regulations aim at ensuring fair treatment of all investors in the m arket.
Stock trading is regulated by national securities exchange commissions and by individual
success of new issues of securities cannot be handled without efficient and fair secondary
stock markets.
Analysis of average real returns on stock in the well developed markets indicate that
reached on average only 1% p.a. The difference bet ween the return on stocks and the risk -
can be justified as risk premium. Such persistent overpricing of risk premium is called an
equity premium puzzle .
Concept
Equity premium puzzle  – the persistent overpricing of risk
opportunity. It means that investor can gain by borrowing at the Treasury bill rate and
investing in stocks. Borrowing limitations and transaction costs may reduc e this arbitrage
The concern about the fair and ethical stock market trading require imposing discipline on
individuals and institutional investors. The organized stock exchanges introduce
surveillance of all transactions at the exchanges. Computerized systems are installed to
detect unusual trading of any particular stock. Any abnormal price or trading volume of
particular stock or unusual trading practices of market participants is investigated.
Additional regulations on imp osing good corporate governance practice for listed
companies are imposed through introduced corporate governance codes. Regulations
employees of the companies) on their boards of directors. Such requirements are aimed at
reducing existing or potential conflicts of interest between management and minority as
company shareholders.  Specifi c regulation concerns are related to restrictions on trading in
case of market downturns.
stock prices or stock indexes reaches a specified threshold level. The necessity of such
reflect the fair value any longer and move into a freefall. The market experi ences huge
Concept
Circuit breakers  – automatic halts or limitations in trading
that are triggered upon the attainment of certain stipulated
price moves.
The NYSE prevailing circuit breakers have three threshold levels for a daily change of
NASDAQ and other large international exchanges impose similar circuit breakers.
Concept
50 point collar  – provision that prohibits computer assisted
trading if Dow Jones  Industrial average index rises or falls by
50 points.
""
Concept
250 point rule  – provision that halts all trading for one hour
if Dow Jones Industrial average index falls by 250 points in a
day.
Trading halts  may be imposed on particular stocks if stock  exchanges believe that market
stock price. Such trading halts are imposed of stocks that are associated with mergers and
ensure that market has complete information before trading on the news. A halt may last a
and can reduce stock market volatility. Drawbacks of trading halts are related to slowing
down the inevi table adjustment of stock prices to the news.
""
5.6. Equity market characteristics
5.6.1.  Stock indicators
Trading of stocks in the secondary market is related to stock price changes.  Investors
valuation of the firm and is found by multiplying the number of shares by their market
price.
Earnings per share  are net profits attributable to common shar eholders divided by the
number of common shares outstanding.
Annual dividend  is a net profit portion distributed to the shareholders over the last year on
a per share basis.
Dividend yield  is the annual dividend per share as a percentage of the stock’s actual price.
The price/earnings ratio (P/E ratio)  is the reciprocal of the earnings yield. It conveys the
same information but avoids the use of percentages.
Concept
Price / earnings ratio (P/E ratio)  – the ratio of the stock
market price to the earnings per share. Sometimes called
earnings multiplier .
reason other than current earnings. The usual presumption is t hat future earnings are likely
to grow rapidly and the price increased in its anticipation. Shares of another company in
the same sector might be judged ‘cheap’ if their P/E ratio were low by comparison (for no
obvious reason).
Stock quotations also includ e volume  of shares traded the previous day. Stock price
quotations show the “last” or closing price  on the previous session.
""
5.6.2.  Stock market indexes
& Poor’s 500 in the United States; the FTSE 100 in the United Kingdom; the Nikkei 225
in Japan; t he DAX in Germany; the CAC 40 in France; and the Hang Seng in Hong Kong.
stock markets (in particular the United States) have numerous indexes.
Indices can be categorize d by the way:
 the number of stocks included;
 the method of weighting the stock prices;
 the method of averaging.   101 The number of stocks  can vary from a small number of largest most liquid company
stocks to a wide portfolio of all stocks traded on a particul ar market. The indexes based on
a small number of stocks have the advantage of easy calculation; however they can hardly
represent stock market as a whole.
Weighting of the stock prices is diverse. Contribution of individual stock prices to an
index may be
price weighted (such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average).
In the case of unweighted indexes all stocks  equal influence irrespective of the sizes of the
companies. Average of daily rates of share price change is calculated each day and gives
stock price change average on one day. The product of such changes starting from a base
date provides the index. The calculation involves two stages: 1) averaging stock price
changes on a single day; 2) compounding the daily averages over time.
Example
An average of 10% rise of share prices on one day is
followed by an average 20% rise of share prices the next.
This gi ves a rise of 32% over the two days: 1.1 x1.2 =1.32 .
Indexes have a number of uses:
 to measure and monitor market movements;
 To provide a means of ascertaining changes in aggregate wealth over time.
 To perform a rol e as barometers of the economy; in particular stock market
movements tend to be leading indicators which means that they provide indications
they provide a means of evalua ting the performance of fund managers by providing
benchmarks against which portfolio managers can be compared.
 To provide the basis for derivative instruments such as futures and options;
performance of a stock market.
deriving fair rates of return for utilities).
Value weighted and arithmetically averaged indexes a key ones. In order to measure stock
arithmetically averaged value -weighted index accurately measures the aggregate value of
the stocks covered by its index. A reliable measure of the total value of the market is also
required for measuring changes in aggregate wealth over time and as a basis for derivative
instruments.
Example
Suppose index is based on just  three stocks whose prices and
numbers of shares issued are the following.
The changes relate to just  one day (so no compounding over
time is involved). Supposed
(a) that stock A rises in price by 15% during the day while
(b) that stock C undergoes a 15% price rise while the other
two prices remain constant dur ing the day.
will be (using arithmetic means):
(New value / Old value) x 100 =
(New value / Old value) x 100 =
It can be seen that a 15% rise in either stock price has the
same effect on the index despite the fact that C has a higher
stock  price and is issued by a larger company.
Arithmetically averaged value -weighted stock indices are the only indices that are
simultaneously.  An index portfolio is a portfol io of shares that matches a stock index in
terms of its constituent shares and their relative proportions.
are referred to as broad capitalization  indices. A good broad capitalization index is
characterized by completeness  and investability . This should make it possible for fund
managers to buy all the shares in the index. Investability is par ticularly important for the
to eliminate illiquid stocks.
The calculation of value -weighted indices has moved towards a free -float basis and away
from a total capital ization basis. Free float includes only those shares that are available for
The stock -index weighting is thus based on the total value of a company’s shares available
Weighting for multi -country stock indices is subject to discussion. One view is to weight
each country by its contribution to global market capitalization. However the ratio of stock
market capitalization to national income (GDP) varies considerably between countries.
Another view is to use national income (GDP) rather than market capitalization for
weighting. .This approach would provi de a more stable weighting since relative GDP is
less volatile than relative market capitalization.
Exercise
Three companies belong to a group and are listed on the stock
Company C owns 10% of company A.
Each company has a total of market capitalization of 100
million Euro.
You wish to adjust for cross -holding to reflect the weights of
these companies in a market capitalization -weighted index.
What adjustments would you make to ref lect the free -float?
Two types of emerging -market stock index are available. There are indices based on total
market capitalization and indices based on the shares available for foreign investors. The
performances of the two different types of index can b e significantly different.
Stock indexes are used by institutional investors as benchmarks for performance
measurement. Index tracker funds aim to replicate the performance of an index.
geometric averaging. However geometric averaging has particular problems. The
geometric mean overestimates the effects of rises in the prices of smaller company stocks
and underestimates the effects of changes in the stock prices of large r companies. Since
geometric means gives too little weight to the stock prices of rapidly growing companies
and too much weight to the stock prices of slow growth companies. So the use of
means tend to understate the true rate of increase in stock  prices. The cumulative effect of
such understatement over time can substantially distort the calculated market rise.
""
5.6.3.  Stock market indicators
number of indicators are being used.
Market size  is characterized by market capitalization. Relative national market
capitalizations give indications of the importance of each country to international
investors. Market capitalization weights are used in the global benchmarks. Thus  market
size forms the basis for global investment strategies.
Market liquidity.  In liquid markets investors can be more active and design various
arbitrage strategies. Market illiquidity tends to imply higher transaction costs. Thus those
passive on such illiquid markets.
Market illiquidity can be measure by transaction volume  and turnover ratio . Turnover
ratio is sometimes called share turnover velocity .
Concept
Turno ver ratio or share turnover velocity  – is the ratio
between the annual transaction volume and the market
capitalization.
important to the operations of the primary market.  High volatility means that buyers in the
primary market are subject to a considerable risk of losing money by having to sell at a  104 lower price in the secondary market. This can reduce the motivation to buy in the primary
market.
Two factors that affect th e price volatility of securities in the secondary market are the
depth and breadth of that market.
The depth of the market  is based on the likely appearance of new orders stimulated by
will be small. A decline in price that stimulates many buy orders would be a small decline.
A deep market would be characterized by the appearance of orders that tend to dampen the
extent of any movement in price. Greater depth is thu s associated with lower volatility.
Breadth of that market reflects the number and diversity of the traders in the market. If
together. A broad market is a large heterogeneous market characterized by relative price
stability .
Concentration. Also c alled degree of concentration  can be measured based on market
This an important measure for investors interested to know if a national market is formed
few large companies provides less opportunities for risk diversification and active
portfolio strategies.
""
5.6.4.  Transaction execution costs
Transaction costs are an important aspect of implementing an investment strategy.
Trading costs consist of two major components:
 explicit costs and
 implicit costs.
execution of an order. Commission costs are fully negotiable and vary systematically by
both the price per share and the number of shares in the transaction.
Implicit trading costs  represent such indirect costs as the price impact of the trade and the
opportunity costs of fai ling to execute in a timely manner or at all. Whereas explicit costs
occurs.
Implicit trading costs include
 opportunity costs.
The impact cost of a transaction is related to the change in market price due to supply and
capture the fact that large trades — those that exceed the number of shares the ma rket-
maker is willing to trade at the quoted bid and ask prices — may move prices in particular
described as the deviation of the transaction price from the “unperturbed price” that would
prevail if the trade did not occur.
The timing cost of a trade is measured as the price change between the time the market
responsibility for the transaction. Timing costs occur when orders are on the trading desk
The opportunity cost of a trade is the “cost” of securities not traded. This cost results from
missed or only partially completed trades. These costs are the natural consequence of the
shares not traded based on the difference between the market price at the time of decision
and the closing price 30 days later.
and timing costs are the costs of forgone opportunities and are invisible. Opportunity costs
they are only partially executed or are not executed at all.
Exercise
An asset manager follows an act ive international asset
allocation strategy . The average execution cost for a buy or a
expected return before the transactions costs is 10  percent.
What is the annual return net of execution costs?
Several methods of reduction of transaction costs  are applied by institutional investors:
for another client of the firm;
execution at a specified discount or premium to the prevailing price. The dealer
at the firm price.
and selects a broker on the basis of his ability to reduce total execution co sts. This
way the search for the best execution is delegated to the broker.
 Use of dealer indications of interest (IOI) . Some party may wish to engage in an
opposite trade for a stock or a basket of stocks. Pooling IOIs from various dealers
helps to identi fy possible pools of liquidity.   106  Use of futures. There is an opportunity cost associated with the delay of execution
of large trade. The fund manager could use futures to monitor the position while
the trade is executed.
automated programs to enter trading orders. The use of computer programs for this
purpose is known as algorithmic trading . Once an asset manager makes a decision to buy
as to minimize transaction costs. Sometimes algorithmic trading is confused with
automated trading. The latter uses computer programs to make investment decisions about
which shares to buy or se ll. Algorithmic trading is used to determine how to place the
buy or sell be made by automated trading.
""
5.7. Stock market efficiency
Investors do not like risk and they m ust be compensated for taking on risk —the larger the
Can investors earn a return on financial  assets beyond that necessary to compensate
them for the risk?
Economists refer to this excess compensation in the stock markets as an abnormal  return .
Whether this can be done in a particular financial market is an empirical question. If a
implement such a strategy is referred to as a market anomaly.
This problem of how efficiently financial market is pricing the assets traded in  those
as a financial market where asset prices rapidly reflect all available public information.
Concept  Efficient market  – a market in which any relevant
information is immediately impounded in asse t prices.
investors should expect to earn a return necessary to compensate them for their
returns.
Check question
What are market forces that tend to make financial markets
informationally efficient?
over- or under -react to information. This does not mean markets are inefficient unless the
Check question
How should investors behave in a market that is
informationally efficient? How does this differ from
behaviour in a market that is not informationally efficient?
security has an old value. The new information hits the market. In an efficient market the
expense of less sophisticated investors.
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
""
Figure 14. Market reaction to new information
""
 Weak form efficiency
 Semi -strong form efficiency
 Strong form efficiency
information about previous prices of the stock has been used to determine today’s price.
So the investor cannot use the same information to predict tomorrow’s price and still earn
abnormal profit. Empirical evidence f rom the most of world stock markets suggests that
(“beat”) the market by using information on past stock prices.
Concept
Random walk theory  – a theory stating that all  current
information is reflected in current security prices and that
future price movement are random because they are caused
by unexpected news.
The view that price changes cannot be predicted has been called the random walk
does not change over time. This constant distribution assumption is a subset of weak form
shifts over tim e. New information  Underreaction  Perfect
efficiency  Overreaction
Old v alue New value
Time  Price   108 Semi-strong form of market efficiency  suggests that current stock prices reflect all
publicly available information. The difference between public information and market
related information is that public information also includes announcements of compa ny
rather that information is accounted for rapidly in stock prices.
distingu ish between the anticipated and unanticipated information. Fully anticipated
information should be already incorporated into security prices. Only unanticipated
information or surprises have an impact on stock prices.
Empirical evidence supports the idea t hat the largest world stock markets are for the most
issue stocks cannot consistently produce abnormal returns.
Strong form of market efficiency assumes that  asset p rices reflect all public and private
strong form implies that you cannot make abnormal returns from trading on inside
are involved in management and have access to  non -public information. Profit from
purposes. Such transactions are called insider trading and have to be disclosed to securities
exchange commission and to the public.
become an important source of investor’s information.
In merger and acquisition transactions the price of the acquired firms stock tends to rise
some i nsiders may be profiting from non -public information.
has shown that average fund earns fair rates of return at the certain the risk levels.
However in some studies the experts forecasted interest rates do not beat the simple
extrapolation of the current interest rates. The studies showed that the current interest rate
is a better forecast of the next period interest rate than the experts’ forecasts.
fair return. This evidence is consistent with market efficiency hypothesis.
Check question
What are the differences among the  three forms of market
efficiency?
109 Check question
How can you describe empirical evidence concerning the
three forms of the efficient market hypothesis?
The implications for market efficiency for issuers of shares is that if the financial markets
pay a price for those shares that reflects their value. This also means that if new
Concept
Volatility – a measure of uncertainty about the future price of
an asset. Typically measured by the standard deviation of
returns on the asset.
""
5.8. Stock valuation
In order to make investment decisions investors conduct valuation of stocks. They search
for undervalued stocks for investing and sell holdings of stocks if they are considered
overvalued.
There are two approaches to what information is useful in the sele ction of stocks and the
timing of the purchase of stocks:
 fundamental analysis and
 technical analysis.
""
5.8.1.  Fundamental analysis
analysis of a company’s operations to assess its  economic prospects. It is based on
fundamental financial characteristics (e.g. earnings) about the company and its
corresponding industry that are expected to influence stock values. The analysis is based
This analysis results in projections of earnings growth. Based on the growth prospects of
determined. The fair value is based on present value calculations.
Concept
Present value  – the current value of a future cash flow. It is
obtained by discounting future cash flow by the market –
required rate of return.
There are various models to estimate the fundamental value of company shares. One
approach is to estimate expected earnings and then multiply by expected price/ earnings
ratio. Another approach is to estimate the value of the assets of the company.
Check question
Describe the price/earnings multiple approach to investing.
What determin es the company’s multiple? Are multiples
stable over time? What does this approach assume about
market efficiency?   110 The estimated fair value is compared to the market price to determine if the stock is fairly
market price above the estimated fair value).
Traditional fundamental analysis has several limitations. It does not quantify the risk
factors associated with a stock and how those risk factors affect its valuation.
In a perfectly efficient market all securities are always correctly priced. The market price
market prices deviate from fundamental value. Financial analysts aim to discover the
fundamental value ahead of the rest of the market participants before the market prices
approach the fundamental value in order to make profits. The actions of such profit -
seeking investors push the market towards efficiency.
""
5.8.2.  Technica l analysis
The aim of the technical analysis is to identify stocks that are candidates for purchase or
Journal and its first editor in the period of 1889 -December 1902.
study of internal stock market information  on price and tradi ng volume of individual
independent of outside economic forces.
Concept
Technical anal ysis – a forecasting method for asset prices
based solely on information about the past prices.
Technical analysis  is aimed to determine past market trends and patterns from which
predictions of future market behavior are derived. It attempts to forecast short -term price
movements. The methodology of analysis is based on the belief that stock market history
tends to repeat itself. If a certain pattern of prices and volumes has previously been
be followed by similar price movements.
Question
What is technical analysis? Why is there a difference between
technical analysis and efficient markets?
The study of past patterns of variables such as prices and trading vol umes allows investors
or rise in price. The focus tends to be on the timing of purchases and sales.
H. Levy has suggested that technical analysis is based on t he following assumptions:
1. The market price of securities (such as shares and bonds) is determined by supply and
demand.
2. Supply and demand are determined by numerous rational and irrational factors. These
4. Trends change in reaction to shifts in supply and demand. These shifts i n supply and
demand can be detected in the action of the market itself.
Assumptions 3 and 4 are controversial.
Supporters of the efficient market hypothesis (EMH) take the view that new information is
trends do not have an opportunity to emerge. Technical analysts believe that new
information does not arrive in the market at a single point in time; they take the view that
new information comes to the market over a period of time. For example new information
moves to its new equilibrium price. T echnical analysts look for the beginning of a
movement from one equilibrium price to another without attempting to predict the new
equilibrium price.
They attempt to profit from forecasting the direction of movement; that is they try to
identify trends and  profit from them.
trend emerges. A slow response of prices to shifts in supply and demand provides the
potential to profit from technical analysis.
ones.
the highest price reached during the day and the bottom shows the lowest price. A short
horizontal line on each vertical line indicates the closing price on the day.
figure.
One aim of the charts is to find areas where price reversals are frequent since this is seen
as presaging a substantial price movement (break out from a trading range).This would
appear as a horizontal stretching out of the chart.
Technical  analysts use a vast number of chart patterns .
interpret this as a signal to sell the stock since it is seen as forecasting a fall in the stock
the bounds.
Reversal patterns.  Chartists frequently believe that when the direction of a share price (or
further price fall is forecasted and eventually co nstitutes a sell signal.
example the average of the last 200 daily prices. (Each day the oldest price is removed
from the calculation of the average and the most recent pric e introduced). Chart patterns
can be based on moving averages as well as daily prices.
One popular technique is to use moving averages and daily prices on the same chart. If the
above their moving average is seen as an indicator of general market sentiment. Points at
which a chart of daily prices crosses a chart of moving average s are seen as significant. A
daily price chart that crosses a moving average chart from below might be seen as
providing a buy signal. The signal may be dependent upon whether the moving average is
rising or falling at the time.
returns following buy signals from a moving average rule were higher than those
following sell signals.
of the overall stock market. Dow theory is based on the belief that market movements are
analogous to movements of the sea. It sees three simultaneous movements in the market.
Daily and weekly fluctuations correspond to ripples. Secondary movements (which  last a
few months) are the waves. Primary trends of a year or more are analogous to tides. It is
the primary trend that is referred to as either a bull or a bear market. The daily or weekly
movements in stock indices are used to forecast changes in the direction of the primary
trend. A bull market is characterized by both high and low points of successive secondary
is above the previous trough.
Trading volume should increase with moves made in the direction of the primary trend; for
sustained by rising support levels and would break through successively higher resistance
levels. When the market eventually falls through a support level and then is unable to
trend.
by informed investors cause the temporary downturns (the waves).
Elliot wave theory. The theory sees markets as moving in cycles. There are very long -run
cycles that last many decades. Superimposed on these are cycles of shorter duration. In
turn there are cycles of even shorter duration superimposed upon the latter cycles. This
pattern of cycles within cycles continues down to cycles of very short duration.
Analysis of the Elliot cycles is based on waves. Each cycle has eight waves. Five waves
carry the market up and three waves carry it down. At the end of the cycle the market is
higher than at the beginning.
Dow theory. Elliot wave theory assumes that markets are driven by investor psychology.
and the market is then carried lower in the wave pattern.
Elliot wave theory is sometimes supplemented by the use of Fibonacci numbers . Fibonacci
numbers seem to fit the pattern of development of a range  of natural phenomena from the
reproduction of petals on a flower to the formation of galaxies. They are also believed to
explain stock market developments. Fibonacci numbers are taken from a sequence in
which each number is found by adding together the pr evious two in the series. The
with support and resistance levels. Elliot wav e theory sees cycles as comprising eight
short interest ratios.
Filter rule  states that an investor should buy when a stock price (or market index) has
should sell when the price or index falls by a particular percentage below a previous high.
market movements.
Relative strength  is measured by the ratio of a stock price to a market index. Changes in
the ratio are taken to indicate buy or sell opportunities. Fo r a momentum trader a rise in the
ratio is a signal to buy the stock (and a fall is a signal to sell).A contrarian trader would
interpret a rise in the ratio as a sell signal (and a fall as a buy signal).
The short interest ratio  is the ratio of short sale s to total trading. A rise in the ratio has
positions will have to be covered by stock purchases. These stock purchases would tend to
push up stock prices.
Trin statistic  is the ratio of the average trading volume in stocks with declining prices to
relatively high volume of trades in declining stocks is indicating net selling pressure.
Trading volume  is considered an indication of the strength of a trend. If a price m ovement
than the price movement in a low trading volume market.
Breadth of the market  shows the extent to which movement in a market index is
reflected widely in the price movements of individual stocks. The most common measure
of breadth is the difference between the number of stocks that rise and the number that fall.
large capitalization companies are increasing.
on belief that the cash will be used to buy shares. This demand for shares would tend to
by investors who expect share prices to fall. Call options give the right to buy shares at a
puts bought  to calls bought is used as an indicator of the expectations of investors.  114 However technical analysts have different interpretations of the ratio. Some see a high put -
call ratio as a sign of a bearish market based on the belief that it indicates that inves tors in
as a buy signal. Contrarian analysts base their analysis on the belief that investors are
usually wrong.
and on the difficulty of using stat istical tests to ascertain its effectiveness.
The past theories proposed by technical analysts tended to be ad hoc and inconsistent.
the recent development of behaviora l finance is contributing to the emergence of
theoretical justifications of technical analysis.
technical analysis could be seen as a technique for identifying those fo rces and forecasting
technical analysts. Technical analysts may be influenced by the same social and
psychological biases as other market participants. Those biases w ould tend to influence
technical analysts’ interpretations of their charts and other data. The forecasts of technical
identify among other market participants.
Institutiona l investors tend to use technical analysis alongside other methods of investment
analysis. The research evidence on the ability of institutional investors to outperform stock
such findings might be expected. Investment analysis may be a zero -sum game in that
those making profits make them at the expense of other analysts.
""
5.9. Processes of consolidation of stock exchanges
differences across stock exchanges. The market capitalisation of the largest world markets
turnover. The stock -market concentration level is almost identical in terms of market
capitalisation. This high level of co ncentration may be explained by the fact that financial
the market positively affects market liquidity and increases traders’ utility. For some of the
key stock ma rkets it appears that even if market capitalisation is similar in value (e.g. LSE
market.
of new funds for firms that raise external financing generally via bank loans or debt
from the mid -1990s.   115 The recent development of the stock exchanges has shown an intensive regional cross -
It was followed by a merger of NASDAQ and O MX Nordic Exchange to form
NASDAQOMX.  In June 2007 Italy’s stock -exchange operator Borsa Italiana accepted a
as the largest securities trading venue in the world.
Securities Exchange (New York) by Deutsche Börse and a merger between NASDAQ and
OMX to fo rm NASDAQOMX.
Processes of consolidation are fostered by multiple share listings of the companies.
Multiple share listing happens when company shares are listed on more than one stock
exchange. They can also be simultaneously traded on formal stock exchang es and OTC
markets. Stocks of very large multinational companies list their shares on several national
stock exchanges. Trading in such stocks can effectively be global and may operate on a
Further globalization of financial markets is related to the tendency for financial markets
in different countries to become integrated into a single market. A major factor leading to
globalization has been the development of telecommunications. Othe r factors have been
national financial markets.
Consolidation is viewed to have several advantages. Larger exchanges enjoy economies of
After the merger market capitalisation of the merged stock exchanges has grown faster
than that of its smaller competitors.
competition and thus lower an exchange’s incentive for financial innovation (in the form
stock market studies have found evidence of reduced fees and improved liquidity.
Liquidity is improved as some brokers automate the routing de cision between the two
exchanges is indirectly combined.
clearing and settlement inf rastructure in Europe has remained fragmented so far. Studies
suggest that post -trading costs per transaction in the EU are substantially higher than in the
financial supervisors to co -operate.
""
5.10. Summary
which need to raise money. Organized stock exchanges as well as over the counter markets
ensure that a secondary market provides a means fo r existing investors to sell their equity
through a rights issue. In addition to common (ordinary) shares there are various types of
preferred shares.
all stock market trading systems share prices are determined by the demand and supply.
orders which specify upper limits to buying prices or lower limits to selling prices.
Most individual investors buy equity instruments indirectly through institutional investors
trading on stock exchanges is done through institutional investors. Some types of
their own shares on a stock exchange directly.
Stock markets operat e most efficiently if they have sufficient depth and breadth. A deep
market contains traders with differing opinions such that some will be forecasting price
rises whilst others expect falls.
The diversity of views helps to prevent large price swings. When stock markets are
would dominate purchases and share prices could fall dramatically (and a stock market
crash can occur).
""
Key terms
 Initial public offering (IPO)
 Leveraged buy -out
 Stock repurchases
 Bid-ask spread
 Market order
 Limit order
 Short sale
 Program trading
 Transaction costs
 Buying on margin
 Maintenance margin
""
Further readings
8. Levy H. (1978). Equilibrium in imperfect market. A constraint on the number of
University of Pennsylvania.
11.Myers and Majluf ( 1984 ). Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when
""
Relevant websites
 www.nasdaqomx.com
 www.n yse.com
 www.londonstockexchange.com
 www.finance.yahoo.com   118
Review questions and problems
1. Discuss the concept of asymmetric information. Explain how it may cau se
managers to serve company investors.
2. Describe how interactions between buyers and sellers affect the market value of
the firm.
3. Why do firms engage in IPOs?
4. What is the danger of issuing too much equity shares in an IPO?
5. What is the role of the investm ent bank that serves the underwriter in an IPO?
6. What factors influence the offer price in an IPO?
7. Explain the differences between generating funds from a venture capital firm and
through an I PO. Why does a firm do a road show before it goes to an IPO?
8. Explain why the stock price of a firm may rise when the firm announces that it is
repurchasing its shares.
9. Discuss the statement: “IPO transfers wealth from unsophisticated investors to
large in stitutional investors who get in at the offer price and get out quickly.”
10. A pharmaceutical company is going through an IPO. It plans to issue 5 million
shares at 12 Euro per share. The investment bank suggests that the offer price for
the shares should be 10 Euro per share to ensure that all the shares should be sold
easily. Explain the dilemma for the pharmaceutical company. What is the
advantage of following the advice of the investment bank? What is the
disadvantage? Is the investment bank incentive to p lace the shares aligned with
the interests of the pharmaceutical company?
11. Explain the difference between a market order and a limit order.
12. How can margin requirement affect the potential return and risk from investing in
shares?
13. What is the maintenance ma rgin?
14. How would the return on stock be affected by a lower initial investment and a
higher loan amount? Explain the relationship between the proportion of funds
borrowed and the return.
15. Describe the short selling process. Under what conditions investor mig ht consider
short selling a specific stock?
16. What are electronic communication networks (ECNs)?
17. What is programme trading?
18. Describe the functions securities exchange commission.
19. What is the role of depository?
20. Assume a company’s shares are priced at 50 Eur o per share. The company has
declared 1Euro per share dividend. An investor purchases the stock on margin
paying 30 Euro per share and borrowing the remainder from the dealer at 10 %
sold at a price of 60 Euro per share?   119 21. What determines the size of the bid -ask spread?
22. Calculate the bid -ask spread for 100 000 shares of X company for the following
market prices in US NYSE:
15. A company with 20 million Euro assets and 45 million Euro liabilities is
technically insolvent. Which of the following investment projects is preferred by
stockholders and which is preferred by bon dholders?
probability of 60% and  20 million with a probability of 40%;
probability of 5% and  20 million with a probability of 95%;
problem?
16. A money market fund is started with assets consisting of 75 day zero coupon debt
a) what is the value of the fund liabilities sold to shareholders?
money market fund’s assets?
value paid out to each fund shareholder?
a) it is defined benefit fund that pays retired p eople 35% of the average of their
last three years of salary?
b) it is defined contribution fund that obligates the firm to contribute matching
funds equal to 50% of the employees’ contributions;
c) it is a defined contribution fund with no matching funds contributed to the
employer.
18. Calculate the net asset values and share prices of the following mutual funds:
a) a 500 000 million shares of an open – end money market fund with assets
365 day basis);
""
120 6. DERIVATIVES  MARKETS
""
Mini contents   The meaning of hedging against risk
 Definition of derivatives markets
 Financial futures and hedging against risk
 Options and their use
""
6.1. Hedging against risk
Investments based on some underlying assets are known as derivatives. The capital
invested is less than the p rice of the underlying asset. This creates financial leverage and
allows investors to multiply the rate of return on the underlying asset. Because of this
 Hedging a portfolio against a specific risk.
taken into consideration when understanding impact of any particular derivatives
transaction.
cash flows generated by the other securities in the portfolio. When the two sets of cash
but increases losses when outcomes are unfavourable. Thus the risk is increased.
The underlying cash position is the twin transaction that is undertaken simultaneously with
the derivatives trade. The underlying cash position motivates the hedge transaction. If the
then it is called macrohedge.
may be hedging only a single financial security on their balance sheets. The hedge is
always tailored to the hedger’s underlying cash position. The hedger’s cash flows as well
as his goals will determine the configuration of the derivatives transaction.
""
6.2. Description of derivatives markets
The establishment and growth of  financial derivatives markets has been major
development trend in financial markets over the past thirty -five years. Financial innovation
and increased market demand led to a rapid growth of derivatives trading. Development of
Concept
Derivatives - securities .bearing a contractual relation to
some underlying asset or rate.
In gene ral derivatives  contracts promise to deliver underlying products at some time in the
future or give  the right to buy or sell them in the future.  They can be based on different
The derivative contract can then be traded in a different market from that in which the
products ar e traded (such as the forex market) are often referred to as cash markets to
distinguish them from derivatives  markets.  Although cash and derivatives markets are
delivery of the underlying product might be required.
There is a close relationship between the prices of derivatives contracts and the prices of
to lapse before the delivery date arrives.
For portfolio managers change of the risk pr ofile through derivative transactions takes a
the costly transfer of secur ities. Thus the dynamic growth of hedge funds can be explained
by the rise of low -cost derivatives markets. Hedge funds typically exploit small price
differences of similar financial products. Only when the transaction cost is smaller than the
The types of derivatives  include:
 Swap contracts
 Various forms of bonds.
A forward contract gives the holder the obligation to buy or sell a certain underlying
and swaps. Futures contracts are forward contracts traded on organised exchanges. Swaps
are forward contracts in which counterparties agree to exchange streams of cash flows
which one party exchanges a stream of interest payments for another party’s stream  of
cash flows. The most important difference with options is that options give the holder the
right (but not the obligation) to buy or sell a certain underlying instrument at a certain date
in the future at a specified price.
Derivatives are traded on org anised exchanges or over -the-counter (OTC) market.
Derivatives contracts traded and privately negotiated directly between two parties belong
markets is substantially higher than the exchanges -traded amount. A trend is a provision of
same way as exchange -based contracts.
exchange -based and OTC derivatives is becoming less clear.
""
6.3. Forward and futures contracts
6.3.1.  Principles of forward and futu res contracts
A futures contract  is a legally binding commitment to buy or sell a standard quantity of a
something at a price determined in the present (the futures price) on a specified future date.
sum games ”.
Concept
Futures contracts - a customized contract to buy (sell) an
asset at a specified date and a specified price (futures price).
potential gain / loss is realized each day (marking to market).
""
The forward contract  is a private agreement between the two parties and nothing happens
between the contracting date and the date of delivery.
Concept
Forward contract - a customized contract to buy (sel l) and
asset at a specified date and a specified price (forward price.
No payment takes place until maturity.
Forwards and futures contracts markets include diverse instruments on:
 Currencies;
 Commodities;
 Interest rate futures;
 Short -term deposits;
 Bond s;
 Stock futures;
 Stock index futures;
 Single stock futures (contract for difference).
There is no money exchanged when the contract is signed. To ensure that each party
margin for each contract and revise it periodically. Margin is determined depending upon
the risk of the individual contract
Futures prices fluctuate every day. Therefore all contract positions are marked to market
at the end of every day. If net price movem ents result in gain on a position of the previous
market.  In effect future contracts are canceled every day and replaced by new contracts
the day.
It is rare for a futures contract to be used for the exchange or physical delivery of the
underlying instruments. Many contracts have no facility for the exchange of the  financial
and are operating in parallel to those markets. Most future contracts are closed out by an
offsetting position  before the delivery occurs.  A long offsets  by going short and the short
offsets by going long at any time before the delivery date.
Offsetting does not involve incremental brokerage fees because the fee to establish initial
trip commission .
The total number of outstanding contracts is called open interest . For every outstanding
contract one person is short (has taken a short position) and one is long (has taken a long
increases by one contract. If a transaction involves offsetting by an existing long and
has a clearing house to keep track of the short and long positions.
Concept
Open interest  or a financi al instrument at some specified
future date.
The main economic function of futures is to provide a means of hedging. A hedger seeks
to reduce an already existing risk. This risk reduction could be achieved by taking a futures
position that would provide p rofit in the event of a loss on the underlying position (and a
loss in the case of a profit on the underlying position).
Concept
Long hedge – a long anticipatory hedge generally involving
buying futures contracts in anticipation of spot purchase .
""
Concep t
Short hedge – a short hedge involves selling futures
contracts to cover the risk on a position in the spot market.
This is the most common use of hedging in investment
management .
The most common products underlying futures contracts are foreign curren cies (exchange
the agreed price and the date of delivery.
forward and future contracts.
A forward contract may or may not be marked to market. Where the counterparties are two
Because there is no clearinghouse that guarantees the performance of a counterparty in a
risk that the other party to the transaction will fail to perform.
When hedging the specified source of risk two questions have to be answered:
 Which contract should be used?
 What amount should be hedged?
The answer to the second question depends upon optimal hedge ratio to be used .
The hedge ratio is the ratio of the size of the (short) position to be taken in futures contract
to the size of the exposure (the val ue of the portfolio to be hedged).
Hedge ratio = ( Number of contracts x Size x Spot price ) / V
where V – is the market value of the underlying asset position.
be derived from this equation:
N = Hedge ratio x V / ( Size x Spot price)
Example
Assume the manager of a futures fund has 1000000 Euro.
The fund manager buys FTSE 100 futures relating to
1000000 of shares when the FTSE 100 stands at 5000.The
futures matur e in one year.
Let’s determine the key characteristic of the contract
The number of futures contracts bought will be equal:
Does any of the 1000000Euro need to be used in the purchase
cost of carry).
money on deposit plus interest on mai ntenance margin (i.e.
capital gain.
""
6.3.2.  Forward and futures valuation
Valuation of all derivative models are based on arbitrage arguments. This involves
developing a strategy or a trade wherein a p ackage consisting of a position in the
borrowing or lending so as to generate the same cash flow as the derivative. The value of
the market price of the derivative toward its theoretical price until the arbitrage
opportunity is elimin ated.
The pricing of futures and forward contracts is similar. If the underlying asset for both
contract that must be dealt with by the pricing model.
the contract. The difference between the two prices is called the basis :
Basis = Futures price – Spot price = F – S
The basis is often expressed as a percentage of the spot pri ce (discount or premium) =
Percentage basis =  ( F – S ) / S
Futures valuation models determine the theoretical value of the basis. This value is
constraint by the existence of profitable riskless arbitrage between the futures and spot
markets for the asse t.
results in the capturing of the arbitrage profit is referred to as a cash-and-carry trade . The
reason for this name is that implementation of the strategy involves borrowing cash to
purchase the underlying asset and “carrying” that underlyin g asset to the settlement date of
the futures contract.
Theoretical futures price = Spot price + ( Spot price) x (Financing cost  - Cash yield)
received from investing in the asset (e.g. dividend) as a percentage of  the cash price.
Example
cost is 1% and cash yield is 2%. Then the theoretical futures
price is:   100 Euro + [100 Euro × (1% − 2%)] = 99 Euro
The future price can be above or below the spot (cash) price depending on the difference
between the financing cost and cash yield. The difference between these rates is called the
cost of carry  and determines the net financing cost .
between the financing cost and the cash yield is a negative value.
Negative carry means that the financing cost exceeds the cash yield.
Zero futures  happen when the futures price is equal to the spot (cash) price.
market) price. The reason is that a futures contract with no time left until delivery is
the futures price is converging to the s pot (cash market) price. This happens as financing
difference is important when defining theoretical futures price.
Theoretical futures pri ce = Spot price + ( Spot price) ×(Borrowing rate -Cash yield)
becomes:
Theoretical futures price = Spot price + ( Spot price)×(Lending rate - Cash yield)
Both equations together provide a band between which the actual futures price can exist
without allowing for an arbitrage profit. The first equation establishes the upper value for
the band while the second equation provides the lower value for the band.
The reverse cas h-and-strategy  trade requires the short selling of the underlying. It is
assumed in this strategy that the proceeds from the short sale are received and reinvested.
individual investor is required to deposit margin (securities margin and not futures margin)
to borrowing. This cost of borrowing can be incorporated into the mode l by reducing the
cash yield on the underlying.
index means that all stocks in the index must be sold simultaneously. This may be difficult
to do and therefore wou ld widen the band for the theoretical future price.
For valuation of stock index futures the fair value premium is used.
The excess of the fair futures price over the spot (i.e. actual) stock index is called the fair
value premium. The formula for the fair  value premium is:
FP = I x [{(r - y)/100} x{d/365}]
to maturity of t he futures contract.
Exercise
Assume that the rate of interest on risk -free bank deposits
were 2.5% p.a.. If money could be borrowed at the same rate
which matures in four months on the basis  of a spot index of
4000 and a zero expected rate of dividend yield on the FTSE
100 portfolio. How would the answer change if the expected
rate of dividend yield were 0.5% p.a. (while the other values
were as before)?
Short cash and carry involves selling  the borrowed stock and buying futures. In this case
the excess of interest over dividends is a net inflow and this gain should be matched by
having a guaranteed future purchase price that exceeds the spot sale price by the amount of
this net inflow. The m oney from the stock sale is put on deposit. In the case of short
of the stock. The excess of interest over dividends is a net inflow that should be matched
by a capi tal loss guaranteed by the futures price.
Exercise
Assume a fund manager has 10000000 Euro for a futures
fund. The fund has an investment horizon of one year. The
FTSE 100 stands at 5000.The one -year interest rate is 4% and
the expected rate of dividend yield on the FTSE 100 over the  127 coming year is 2%.The fund manager puts 10000000 Euro in
a bank deposit and obtains market exposure by buying FTSE
100 futures.
required for a fund that has a 10000 000 Euro exposure to the
FTSE 100?
b) What is the fair futures price?
c) What is the rate of capital gain on the fund if the FTSE 100
its fair level?
d) What is the total return on the fund i f the FTSE 100 rises
by 6% over the year?
futures contracts were to provide a market exposure of
20000000 Euro (while the sum of money on deposit remains
at 10000000 Euro)?
f) Is it the case that t he whole of the 10000000 Euro can be
kept in a bank deposit?
""
Exercise
yield on the FTSE 100 over the next three months is 2% p.a.
a) What is t he fair price of a futures contract due to mature in
three months?
c) If speculat ors expect that the FTSE 100 will be 4700 in
happen in the futures and spot markets?
""
6.3.3.  Use of forwards and futures
Going long or short in futures market without any offsetting position is described a s taking
a speculative position .
In a futures hedge  an investor offsets a position in the cash (spot) market with a nearly
opposite position in the futures market. The objective is to reduce the overall risk position.
The hedged position has lower expected  return than an unhedged position.
In a long hedge  the investor takes a long position in futures. In a short hedge  the investor
takes a short position in futures. A very important type of hedge occurs when an investor
with the long position in the spot ma rket simultaneously take a short position in the futures
contracts.
In short hedging the hedger may be able to find a futures contract for a virtually identical
item as hedgers cash (spot) position. Then the gains (losses) in the spot market are offset
by the gains (losses) in the futures market. This offset is shown in the figure  bellow.   128 Figure 15 . Profit profile for perfect hedge
at 50 Euro. As the spot price increases (decreases) the investor gains (loses) exactly the
same amount. The profit profile for a spot position is offset exactly by t he short futures
value of the net position a s the spot price changes. F lat profile represents a perfect hedge.
hedge . The relationship between a spot position and a futures contract in a cross hedge is
not a perfect straight line. It is shown as a dotted line in the figure below. Here it is
assumed tha t the investor takes a long position in the spot market in grade A investment
assets. Grade B asset prices are assumed to move half as fast as grade A asset prices. Th e
B investment assets and the net position. The gains and losses on the spot position are cut
in half for grade A investment assets by the sho rt hedge.
""
Figure 16. Profit profile for a cross hedge  Short
Futures  Long
Spot
Hedge
P  0 Profit  Loss
Short Futures:
Grade B  Long Grade A
Hedge
P  Profit  Loss  Hedge
0  129
The hedger can estimate the slope of the line (β) by using r egression analysis in order to
shorts β units of the futures. β is called the optimal hedge ratio.
Exercise
Assume a fund manager anticipates the receipt of 5 million
Euro in one month. The intention is to invest the money
equal now to 8800.How can the fund manager hedge against
a rise in stock prices using futures?
futures is not perfect. The optimal hedge ratio is the best in the sense that the expected
change in the hedged position is zero.
6.3.4.  Futures contracts: stock index futures
For stock index futures the deliverable commodity (underlying asset) is a common stock
index. Some stock index futures are actively traded contracts.
contract.
Arbitrage en sures that the futures contract should be equivalent of a buying the stock in the
F stock = P stock ( 1 + r d ) d – Div
above P stock ( 1 + r d ) d – Div.
Figure 17. Program trading arbitrage  Actual futures  Arbitrage profit
Theoretical futures
Spot price
Time  Price   130
This arbitrage is to take short position in futures and b uy the stocks in the index. The
arbitrage position is held until the futures and spot prices are once more in line. Both
positions are closed for profit.
Such type of arbitrage involves the purchase and sale of large number of stocks in the
rapidly by computer program before the arbitrage profit opportunity disappears.
""
6.3.5.  Contracts for difference (CFD)
A contract for difference (CFD) is an instrument that has similarities with a futures
asset (or even non -marketable instruments such as stock indi ces).
CFD contracts do not have fixed expiry dates and can be closed at any time. A CFD is a
deal between an investor and a broker. The investor is expected to pay a deposit (typically
10% of the value of the shareholding to which the CFD is related). If l osses are made from
to provide more cash in order to maintain the value of the deposit at 10%. If the position
An inve stor who takes a long position in a CFD relating to a share would profit from a
calculated by reference to a specified share price (typically slightly above the s hare price
when the contract was entered into; the offer price of the share might be used). If the share
between the current price and the specified price.
below the specified price. An investor with a long CFD is treated as if the shares are
bought with borrowed money and the broker can do in the absence of offsetting short
position s. The investor pays interest and receives dividends.
An investor who takes a short position in a CFD profits from price falls and loses from
price rises. The extent of profit or loss is based on the difference between the current share
price and a share p rice slightly below the share price at the time that the contract was
entered into. The bid price of the share might be used also.
An investor with a short CFD is treated as if the shares are sold short and the receipts are
put on deposit. The investor re ceives interest and pays sums equal to the share dividends.
Bid/offer prices might be quoted.
Potential losses are very large in the event of prices moving heavily against the
anticipations of an investor. The use of stop -loss order ensures automatic closu re of a
significantly beyond the chosen stop -loss price.
share is reduced since the cash flows of long and short investors would match each other.
Some concern has been expressed that if investors use CFDs as a substitute for share
between long and short positions.
By using CFDs investors can obtain leveraged investments or short positions on a share (or
other instrument).An almost identical alternative to CFDs is spread betting.
""
6.4. Swaps
A swap  is an agreement whereby two parties ( called counterparties ) agree to exchange
periodic payments. The cash amount of the payments exchanged is based on some
notional amount . The cash amount each counterpart y pays to the other is the agreed -upon
periodic rate times the notional amount. The only cash that is exchanged between the
exposed to counterparty risk .
The types of swaps typically used by non -finance corporations are:
 credit default swaps.
Interest rate swap  is a contract in which the counterparties swap payments in the same
interest rate and the other party a floati ng interest rate. The floating interest rate is
commonly referred to as the reference rate .
different currencies.
counterparties is based on the value of a particular physical commodity. Physical
A credit default swap  (CDS)  is an OTC derivative that permits the buying and selling of
credit protection against particular types of events that can adversely affect the credit
quality of a bond such as the default of the borrower.
typica l swap. There are two parties in the CDS contract: the credit protection buyer and
protection seller a payment at specified dates to insure against the impairment of  the debt
of a reference entity due to a credit -related event. The reference entity is a specific issuer.
The specific credit -related events are identified in the contract that will trigger a payment
by the credit protection seller to the credit protection  buyer are referred to as credit events .
compensate for the loss in the value of the debt obligation
""
6.5. Options
6.5.1.  Options definition
An option  is a contract in which the option seller grants the option buyer the right to enter
into a transaction with t he seller to either buy or sell an underlying asset at a specified
price on or before a specified date.
or in the over -the-counter (OTC) market.
The specified price i s called the strike price  or exercise price  and the specified date is
called the expiration date .
The option seller grants this right in exchange for a certain amount of money called the
the option buyer is the option holder.
The asset that is the subject of the option is called the underlying . The underlying can be
futures contract.
The option writer can grant the option holder one of two rights. If the right is to purchase
is a put option .
.Concept
Call options: Options that g ive the right to buy a given
amount of a financial instrument or commodity at an agreed
oblige investors to do so.
""
Concept
Put options: Options that give the right to sell a given
amount of a financial instrument or commodity at an agreed
to do so.
An option can also be categorized according to when it may be exercised by the buyer or
the exercise style:
 European option can only b e exercised at the expiration date of the contract.
 American option  can be exercised any time on or before the expiration date.
 Bermuda option or Atlantic option – is an option which can be exercised
before the expiration date but only on specified dates  is called .
The terms of exchange are represented by the contract unit and are standardized for most
contracts. The option holder enters into the contract with an opening transaction.
sale of an existing option by the holder is a closing sale.
A profit profile for a call option is provided in the figure bellow. Suppose an investor is
bond for three months until the option expires. Possible profits or losses will be on the
Euro.
""
Figure 18. Profit profiles for a call option
The maximum profit that the option writer can realize is the option price. The option buyer
risk.
The described call option is called a naked call option. This is a risky position because the
potential of loss is unbound.
Another less risky contract is writing a covered call. Such a contract involves the purchase
of the underlying security and the writing of a call option on that security.  Profit profile
exercised and the covered call writer must sell t he underlying security at the exercise price
The purchase of a call option creates a position referred to as a long call position .
The writer of a call option is said to be in a short call position .
The buying of a put option  creates a financial position referred to as a long put position .
The profit or loss for this position at the expiration date depends on the market price of the
if asset’s  price falls to zero.
Writing a put option  creates a position referred to as a short put position . The profit and
loss profile for a short put option is the opposite of the long put o ption. The maximum
profit from this position is the option price.  100
E 104 Write call  Buy call  Buy
underlying
security
Underlying
asset at
expiration  Profit
+ 4
0
""
Loss   134
Figure 19. Profit profile for writing a covered call option
""
Figure 20graphically shows this profit and loss profile.
""
""
Figure 20. Profit profile for a put option  E Write covered
call Buy underlying
security
Underlying asset
at expiration  Profit
Loss  0 C ●
Profit
Buy
put
Loss  –  pp  ● 97 100
E Underlying
asset at
expira tion
underlying asset rises. Selling calls and buying puts allows the investor to gain if the price
of the underlying asset falls.
""
6.5.2.  Components of the Option Price
The theoretical price of an option is made up of two components:
 intrinsic value;
 premium over intrinsic value.
The intrinsic value is the option’s economic value if it is exercised immediately. If no
zero.
to zero.
Concept  Intrinsic value of an option: The profit available from
immediately exercising an option. Where the value of the
right granted by the option is equal to the market value of the
the option is in-the-money . If exercising an option would
market price is below the strike price.
option’s market price exceeds its intrinsic value. It is the expectation of the option buyer
that at some time before the expiration date the changes in the market price of the
underlying asset will increase the value of the rights of the option. Because of this
An option buyer has two ways to realize the value of an option position.
The first way is by exercising the option. The second way is to sell the option in the
market.
Put-Call Parity Relationship.  For a European put and a European call option with the
This relationship is known as the put-call parity relationship .
The relationship is equal to:
Put option price − Call option price = Present value of strike price + Present value of cash
distribution − Price of underlying asset
Put-call parity implies that:
Call option price >= Put option price - Lending present value of exercise price
The value Put option price - Lending present value of exercise price  has been called
Merton’s lower bound . It follows that the cash flows from buying a call option can never
be less than buying the underlying security and borrowing the underlying value of the  136 exercis e price. Merton’s bound is illustrated in the   Figure 21. As the price of the
Figure 21. Merton‘s bound
""
6.5.3.  Determinants of the Option Price
The factors that affect the price of an option include:
 Market price o f the underlying asset.
 Strike (exercise) price of the option.
 Time to expiration of the option.
 Expected volatility of the underlying asset over the life of the option.
 Anticipated cash paym ents on the underlying over the life of the option.
and (2) the option is an American option or a European option.
Market price of the underlying asset.  The optio n price will change as the price of the
Exercise (strike) price  Shortsell
Call price
Price of
underlying
asset
E $
Merton’s bound: P – ED
longer remaining life is shown in Figure 22
Figure 22. Impact of longer remaining life on the value of a call  option
""
""
Figure 23. Impact of the volatility of the underlying asset on the value of a call option
C2 has a longer life than C 1
Merton’s bound is higher
for C 2 because D 2 < D 1  C
P C2 P – ED 2
P – E
C1 P – ED 1
E
C2
P
E C
P – ED
C1 C2 has greater volatility of
underlying asset
P – E   138 Expected Volatility of the Underlying  asset over the life of the option.  All other factors
change so as to benefit the option buyer at some time before expiration.
Figure 24. Impact of higher interest rate on value of call option
asset requires an investment of funds. Buying an option on the same quantity of the
underlying makes the difference between the underlying’s price and the option price
available for investme nt at an interest rate at least as high as the risk -free rate.
attractive the call option will be relative to the direct purchase of the underlying. As a
Anticipated cash payments on the underlying  over the life of the option cash payments
on the underlying tend to decrease the price of a call option. The cash payments make it
payments on the underlying tend to increase the price.
""
6.5.4.  Option pricing models
An option pricing model uses a set of assumptions and arbitrage arguments to derive a
theoretical price for an option. Deriving a theoretical option pr ice is much more
complicated than deriving a theoretical futures or forward price because the option price
depends on the expected volatility of the underlying over the life of the option.
Several models have been developed to determine the theoretical pr ice of an option. The
most popular one was developed by Fischer Black and Myron Scholes (1973) for valuing
European call options on common stock.
C’
C C
P C’ has a higher interest rate  P – ED’
P – ED
P – E  139 6.5.5.  Mixed strategies in options trading
Call and put options and the buying and writing of options can be combin ed to try to profit
from expected conditions in the market. Some of such strategies are as follows:
Cases where a trader either buys or writes options but does not do both
Straddle – a call and a put at the same strike price and expiry date
Strangle – a call and a put for the same expiry date but at different strike prices
Strap – two calls and one put with the same expiry dates; the strike prices might be the
same or different
Strip – two puts and one call with the same expiry date; again strike prices mig ht be the
same or different
uncertain whether they will rise or fall. The buyer of a strap gains more from a price rise
than from a price fall; the buyer of a strip g ains more from a price fall. The writer in all
the life of the option.
Spreads: combinations of buying and writing options
reverse.
different intermediat e prices.
Both a butterfly and a condor are vertical spreads – all options bought or sold have the
same expiry date but different strike prices. Horizontal spreads have the same strike prices
but different expiry dates. With diagonal spreads both the strik e prices and the expiry dates
are different. Other mixed strategies have equally improbable names. They include vertical
bull call; vertical bull spread; vertical bear spread; rotated vertical bull spread; rotated
vertical bear spread.
""
6.6. Summary
The need fo r sophisticated risk management in the face of highly volatile exchange rates
provides one of the principal reasons for the growth of derivatives markets. These allow
risk to that which they face in the underlying markets. The principal types of derivatives
Both offer the possibility of very high rates of profit. Futures do this through the system of
the premium for the right to trade at the specified price.
interest rates and stock exchange indices. They are widely used for speculation as well as
new forms of options contracts appearing regularly.   140 Forward and futures  contracts are likely to provide cheaper protection against loss than
options are generally preferable if the hedger is uncertain about the direction the price of
the un derlying asset is likely to move. A hedger who is confident about the direction in
which the price will move is more likely to choose forward or futures contracts or remain
in an open position and accept the risk of a price change.
A trader who is confide nt that the price will fall may (a) sell the product before the price
falls; (b) take an offsetting short position by selling futures contracts; or (c) sell the
currency forwards. This eliminates entirely her exposure to the price fall.
A trader who is un certain in which direction the price will move may choose options. Even
preferable to options because they are likely to offer her cheaper protection. Options are
preferable if the trader has no view or thinks that the price is more likely to rise than fall.
Derivatives markets have been controversial in recent years. Many companies have
the international financial system  continue to be widespread
Key terms
 Options
 Futures
 Forwards
 Swaps
Review questions and problems
futures contracts and options as m eans of speculation.
2.  How do futures markets seek to protect themselves and their clients against
default risk?
3. Why might the increased protection provided to individual traders by the
derivatives markets increase the risk of the whole financial system run ning into
difficulties?
4. Why did the US central bank (the Federal Reserve) feel the need to rescue a
privately owned and run hedge fund (LTCM) in late 1998? Should public
resources be used in this way?
5.  How many ways are there of a Latvian investor going sh ort in US dollars or
giving itself the opportunity of going short? Why might a Latvian investor wish
to go short in US dollars?
6. Why is it more risky to write (sell) options contracts than to buy them?
7. Consider the following statement: A speculator who felt  that interest rates were
likely to rise or a currency’s value decline would go short in the relevant asset
by selling a futures contract.
a) Why would a speculator go short rather than long in these two cases?
b) What does going short in interest rates me an?
c) How does selling a futures contract allow one to go short?
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Capital Market Authority
Financial Investments
and Stock Markets
Introduction
The cycle of one’s life starts by completing his edu-
his savings and employ them in various areas in or -
der to increase his income more and more.
to grow. Wealth is defined as the accumulated sav-ings. The individual seeks to place wealth in invest-ments which include tangible and financial assets
An individual diversifies his investments and balance
them to ensure achieving his objectives. His short-
Income is return from
work and property owned by an indi-vidual.
Purchasing power is the capacity
work
Income Consumption
saving
Wealth: Financial as-
etc)Wealth:Tangible
A person should employ his wealth to achieve
already been mentioned previously. This concept can be reflected by the saying: “Do not put all your eggs in one basket”.
Unit Two: The Financial Mar -
ket
They divide corporate capital into stakes or portions
4its management and decisions according to his stake
2-1 Definitions
The Financial Market: a market where securities are traded (sold and bought).
Stocks are bought and sold on the market in a regu-
lated and legal manner so dealers do not lose their
There are various types of stocks which are traded
on the market. There are stocks that give their hold-er the right to attend the general assembly of the company and express his opinion on the way the company is managed.
There are also bonus stocks: they are  free shares
granted to the owners of ordinary stocks in order to increase what they own in the company  and to increase the company’s capital as well.
right and priority to obtain his rights from the com-pany.
There are two main types of stock markets: the pri-
mary market and the secondary market. The Primary Market:  a market where stocks are
2-2 Functions of Financial Market:
• Saving Encouragement: by providing fields to
business.
• Risk mitigation: investing in the stock market
• Increase economic growth; financing projects
and investments listed in the stock market con-tributes to producing more goods and services and supporting economic growth. This leads to an increase in career opportunities for job seekers.
projects and companies contributes to steering the money and savings towards more feasible and prof-itable projects. 2-3  Characteristics of Financial Markets:
Wealth: Financial as-
Stock market72-4  Efficiency of Financial Markets
The efficiency of financial markets means that the
chasing for any trader at anytime.
Value and Market Value :
An investor wanted to establish a plastic com-
Nominal Value:  The share value when the company is established.
Book Value: What shareholders expect to receive if the company were liquidated. The book value can be
Unit Three: International
Stock Markets
Newspaper and media headlines are full of news
about international stock markets. As they say: the world has become globalized where the news is spread between its parties easily and simply. The
most important news to be published about these markets is the performance indexes which we will define its concept then review some of the interna-tional and regional indexes as the following:
3-1 Stock Market Index :
affected by the supply ( the number of stocks available to investors) and the demand ( the number of stocks investors wish to buy). The investor can know the market value of a share through the Saudi Stock Exchange (Tadawul) website in addition to other means of mass media. Market Capitalization: it is calculated by multiplying  the number of a company’s  stocks by the current market price of the stock.
10A country has created a stock market; three compa -
nies offered their stocks for initial sale in each case
With the start of trading in stocks and with the end
The rate of change in the index (Market Return) is
this stock in the index.
3-2 The Importance of the Index:
3-3 Some of the Global Indexes:
Global financial markets have two types of in-dexes: General indexes  that measure the mar -
• DOW Jones: is a major index that consists
of four sub-indexes and the most famous of
which is the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The value of the index is calculated based on the stocks of the thirty largest industrial com-panies in the United States of America.
• Standard and Poor’s 500 (S&P 500): It com-
• NASDAQ: is the largest among all U.S. indexes.
• United Kingdom :
• France
CAC 40: this index includes the stocks of the forty most important French companies in Paris market.
• Germany
3-3-3  Asian Market Indexes :
• - Japan
Nikkei Index : contains the stocks of 225 com-
value of the companies registered in the T okyo Stock Exchange.
• Other Asian Indexes :
1. South K orea: KCS Index2.
Hong K
ong : HANG SENG Index
3.
Ma
laysia: KLSE Index
4.
China :
Shanghai Index
3-3-4 Arab Market Indexes:
• The United Arab Emirates: (Dubai and Abu Dhabi markets ).
• Oman: MSM   • Kuwait: KSE
• Egypt: CMA   • Bahrain:  BSE
• Morocco:  MASI  • Qatar: CBQUnit Four: The Saudi Stock Ex-
change
4-1 Historical Background
The Saudi stock exchange is one of the newly es-
tablished emerging markets. Market dealing began when the first joint-stock company (the Arab Auto-mobile) in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was estab-lished in 1354H (1953).
Stock trading started in the Saudi market in a di-
ket Law (CML) approval of the financial market has
4-2 Characteristics of the Financial
Market:
The Saudi stock market is new compared to the
the level of performance in the Saudi stock market. Its name consists of the first initials of the English name “Tadawul All Share Index (TASI)”. The Index is calculated as the weighted average of stock prices of the companies operating in the market.
“Tadawul” is an electronic system that is char -
acterized with efficiency in stock dealing and
trading (selling and buying) in the Saudi market.14Each sector has an index that measures the perfor -
mance by tracking the prices of companies’ stocks
Note that the number of companies has been grow-
ing since the inception of the Capital Market Author -
It is expected that the view on the Saudi stock mar -
ket remains positive and optimistic in the continu-
.Industrial In-
vestmentPertochimecal
IndustriesBanking and Fi-
nancial Services
Agriculture &
Food IndustriesEnergy & Utili-
tiesCommunica-
tions
Multi-Invest-
mentInsurance Retail
Real Estate
developmentBuilding and
ConstructionCement
Hotels and
T ourismMedia and Pub-
lishingTransport
15Unit Five: Financial Investment
Strategies:
There are a lot of financial and real investment op-
• Stocks: investing in stocks is characterized by a
• Bonds: it is known that private companies need
• Mutual Funds: these funds pool savings through
16vestors entrust the entity that manages their
The most important factor that drives investors to
investing in a particular type of securities is search-
ing for an investment that generates a high return and have a degree of risk which the investor can
tolerate.5-2  The Financial Investment Strategy
Elements of the Financial In-
vestment Strategy
A sound financial investment strategy requires de-
termining the following elements:
• Objectives.
• Financial potential available to the investor.
• Time frame necessary to achieve the objectives.
• Expected return on investment.
• Alternatives: any other available investment ar -
eas in which the return on investment can be
achieved.The areas of investments in mutual funds are diverse
17The following are considerations that must be taken
into account in setting up the financial investment strategy:
• Realism: objectives must be achievable and not
• Flexibility: it means the ability to adjust the ob-
jectives and alternatives through the disposal of current investments and replace them with new ones according to any developments in order to achieve the objectives. • Familiarity with the basics of financial invest-
ment: It means knowing the investment tools
and mechanisms in order to avoid putting the
investor at risk and making him able to take the best investment decisions.
5-3 Basics of Financial Investment:
The most important basics of financial investment
are:
• Identifying investment characteristics: For exam-
18experience these funds’ mangers have.
• Identifying risks associated with investing: Risks
in the simplest sense means the possibility that
into three categories:
• Company-specific risk: the source of risk is from
inside the company that issued the securities.
• Market risk: it is linked to the economic con-
• Concentration risk: it is where a financial port-
folio is undiversified and consists of one stock or a few stocks. This means that any potential decline in the performance of the company is-suing the stock may lead to great losses. Often
Recession is a decline in the level of economic activ-
areas of financial investment.
• Investment Preference Criteria: They are the
• Return: is the percentage of change in asset
value (subject of investment). The investor usu-ally seeks financial investments that achieve the highest possible return.
• Risk: measured by the fluctuation of the asset
• Diversification: diversified investments means
that the financial portfolio contains various and different types of securities (various stocks + bonds + mutual funds) with different returns and risk levels. One of the qualities of diver -
sity is that it leads to reducing investment risks which is one of the desired characteristics in
any portfolio.
Which one is better? Putting all your eggs in one
basket or putting them in several baskets!
• Liquidity: the ability to easily convert in-
vestments into cash without losses.
Unit Six: Opportunities and
Challenges
Financial markets provide many opportunities that
increase the potential of profitability and growth. These markets also face a lot of challenges that re-duce their efficiency and increases financial invest-ment risks . In the following section we address the most important opportunities and challenges and conclude with a general advice for investors.
Shares of an investment port-
folio that lacks diversification
(higher risk level)Shares          Bonds    Mutual funds
Diversified investment (lower risk)
206-1 Opportunities
The tremendous developments in communications
and information technology in the past few years have impacted all aspects of life and economy in-cluding financial markets. The financial applications of these developments have contributed to creating many investment opportunities and reducing the ef-fort and cost associated with financial and invest-ment operations. That is by:
• Reducing the cost and effort required to carry out the buying and selling transactions. It be-came possible for the investor to carry out any transactions directly through the internet or a financial broker in any place of the world.
• Making use of the financial and consulting ser -
vices offered by licensed financial consulting companies and using their capabilities in manag-ing financial portfolios for the investors’ benefit.
• Benefiting from financial globalization. It is now
possible for any investor in the world to take advantage of the investment opportunities that may present themselves in other countries.
• Increasing the investors’ capacity to diversify their investments and take advantage of addi-tional opportunities that are more satisfying for their investment needs.
6-2 Challenges
tune and become debtors.
22stock prices up by trading. This will lead  small
investors to rush and buy weak performing  stocks. Big investors make profits at the ex-pense of small investors through speculation on those stocks. This results in financial crises that have a substantial negative impact on the market.
6-3 Tips for Investors:
ity in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia launched a center on its website to educate investors. It also published many brochures and organized various educational events from time to time to
raise investor awareness.
rowing.
• An investor should diversify his financial invest-ments after determining the risk levels he can tolerate.
• An investor should determine the type of in-vestment in terms of time to match his goals. Is it a short-term investment or a long-term or in between?
• Do not follow market rumors which could be passed only to mislead some investors.
age to bear all the consequences of his deci-
23sions; overreacting could increase his loss.
companies.
Capital Market Authority
PO. Box 87171 Riyadh 11642
T oll-Free 800 245 1111
Contact Center 00966 11 205 3000
Fax 00966 11 490 6599
Email info@cma.org.sa
© All Rights reserved
Y ou can also visit our website on the following address
www.cma.org.sa
“Many are familiar with early stage investing. Many are familiar with technology. Many are
Investment Services and serial FinTech investor and advisor
Managing Director of Vella Ventures Ltd
“Fantastic to see a book on FinTech brought together by the community and written by the community. It will be valuable to anyone starting off in FinTech”.
Startupbootcamp FinTech and InsurTech
“The FinTech Book  really lives up to its title. Janos and Susanne have not just succeeded in
BookThis edition first published 2016
© 2016 Susanne Chishti and Janos Barberis
Registered office
our website at www.wiley.com.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © pkproject/Shutterstock
Book
The Financial Technology Handbook for
Edited by
Susanne Chishti
Janos BarberisPreface  viii
About the Editors  x
Acknowledgements  xii
1. Introduction
Banking and the E-Book Moment  6
Why We’re so Excited About FinTech  10
Current Trends in Financial Technology  13
2. FinTech Themes
Banks Need to Think Collaboration Rather Than Competition  20
Global Compliance is Key  22
Lending (Capital) in the 21st Century  25
The Next Big Innovation in FinTech – Identity  28
Tech Giants Becoming Non-Bank Banks  31
Design is No Longer an Option – User Experience (UX) in FinTech  34
3. FinTech Hubs
Nurturing New FinTech Communities  42
La (French) FinTech Connection  45
The Journey Towards an Integrated FinTech Ecosystem – The
Netherlands  48
Vienna as the No. 1 FinTech Hub in Mobile Payments?  53
India’s FinTech Ecosystem  56
4. Emerging Markets and Social Impact
FinTech – The Not So Little Engine That Can  66
Why Am I Not Gonna Be Able to Enter a Bank?  69
Reach Financial Inclusion  75
The Social Impact of FinTech in Nigeria  78
India and the Pyramid of Opportunity  81
5. FinTech Solutions
Rewiring the Deal – The Path Forward for B2B Supply Chains  88
Payments and Point of Sales (POS) Innovation  92
Predictive Algorithms – Building Innovative Online Banking
Solutions  95
Big Data is the Cornerstone of Regulatory Compliance
Systems  100
FinTech Solutions in Complex Contracts Optimization  106
Behavioural Biometrics – A New Era of Security  109
Ultra-Fast Text Analytics in Trading Strategies  112
Regulated Crowdfunding Ecosystems  117
Remittances – International FX Payments at Low Cost  120
FinTech Solutions for Small Businesses  123
Payment Solutions Including Apple Pay  125
FinTech Solutions Benefiting other Sectors  128
FinTech Innovation for Wearables  131
6. Capital and Investment
Investment and Capital – Back to Basics  138
Angel Investing – Access to “Smart Money” to Fund the Best
FinTech Companies  141
Crowdfunding and Marketplace (P2P) Lending – Online Capital
Marketplaces as New Asset Classes to Access Funding  144
The Digital Investment Space – Spanning from Social Trading to
Digital Private Banking – A FinTech Sector Made for
Disruption?  147
Leading the Way with an Investor-led Approach to
Crowdfunding  149Contents
viContentsviMy Robo Advisor was an iPod – Applying the Lessons from
Other Sectors to FinTech Disruption  152
Crowdsourced Alpha  155
To Crowdsource a Hedge Fund  160
Providing Capital and Beyond  162
7 . Enterprise Innovation
Can Banks Innovate?  170
FinTechs and Banks – Collaboration is Key  179
Partnerships Are the Key to Addressing Financial and Digital
Exclusion  183
Corporate Venture Capital   –  The New Power Broker in the
FinTech Innovation Ecosystem  186
The Insurance Opportunity  190
8. More Success Stories
eToro – Building the World’s Largest Social Investment Network  196
Bankable – Banking as a Service  201
The Next Chapter in Citi’s Story of Innovation  203
FinTech Trends from the Frontline – Building Collaborative
Wholesale Banks  2069. Crypto-currencies and Blockchains
FinTech + Digital Currency   – Convergence or Collision?  212
Blockchain and Crypto-currencies  217
10. The Future of FinTech
How Emerging Technologies Will Change Financial Services  226
The Future of Financial Services  229
Banking on Innovation Through Data  232
Why FinTech Banks Will Rule the World  235
Banks Partnering with FinTech Start-ups to Create an Integrated
Customer Experience  241
The Rise of BankTech – The Beauty of a Hybrid Model for Banks  245
FinTech Impact on Retail Banking – From a Universal Banking
Model to Banking Verticalization  248
Embracing the Connected API Economy  253
Banking Like Water  258
Eliminating Friction in Customers’ Financial Lives  261
FinTech is the Future Itself  264
A Future Without Money  267
Ethics in FinTech?  270
List of Contributors  273
Index  291
Contentsvii51%60%
50%40%30%20%
10%
0%
Platforms
Business to ConsumerMobile Tech
Business to BusinessRetail Banking
Investment BankingTransaction...
Financial Data & AnalyticsCorporate Banking Risk Management
Compliance/RegulatoryAsset ManagementBlockchain
Private BankingCryptocurrenciesInsurance
Cybersecurity49% 48% 48%46%
43% 43%Expertise of our Authors
39%
34%30%
25% 24% 24%23%19% 18% 17%High School DegreeEducation of our Authors
Undergraduate University Degree
Postgraduate University Degree11%
29%
60%Preface
We both started off delving into the field of FinTech at roughly the same point in
The reader will notice that this is the first “globally crowdsourced” treatment
Figure 1:  What is the highest educational qualification of our
authors?Figure 2:  Areas in which our authors have domain expertise (multiple
More than 160 authors from 27 countries submitted 189 abstracts to be part of
Pre FaceviiiOur selected final authors come from 20 countries. The majority have
Figures 3 and 4 show that almost half our finalist authors are entrepreneurs working
Almost a fifth of our authors work for start-ups with up to five people and another
12%
28%47%Established Financial Services
CompanyWhere do our Authors work?
Established Tech Company
Service Providers
FinTech Start-ups
Figure 3:  Type of company in which our authors were working17% 19%
55%9%1−5 peopleSize of Companies where our Authors work
6−100 people
101−1000 people
1001+ people
Figure 4:  Size of companies for which our authors work
“intrapreneurs” in large established organizations who all are committed to play
a significant role in the global FinTech revolution. These remarkable people are willing to share their insights with all of us in these pages.
efforts of all contributors to The FinTech Book  (both those who submitted their
Susanne Chishti and Janos Barberis
The FinTech Book  Editors
2016
Pre FaceixSusanne Chishti
You can follow Susanne on Twitter via her account @SusanneChishti.
About FINTECH Circle
Janos Barberis
the way towards what is now regarded as RegTech.
Janos holds an LLM in Corporate and Financial Law (HKU) as well as a BSc in
You can follow Janos on Twitter via his account @JNBarberisAbout FinTech HK
platform that has the objective of catalysing Hong Kong’s position as a world-leading FinTech Hub. FinTech HK produced Hong Kong’s first FinTech Report: “The Rise of FinTech: Getting Hong Kong to Lead the Digital Financial Transition in APAC.”
* The report is available on: http://www.slideshare.net/FinTechHk/fintech-hong-kong-report.
About the editorsxiAcknowledgements
When we started discussing our desire for a book which would summarize the
This global effort of crowdsourcing such insights is a world first. We are aware
The authors you will read about have been chosen by our global FinTech
We also wanted to select the best publisher for the book and we have chosen Wiley
to allow readers globally to buy their hardcopies or order online. A special thanks goes to our fantastic editor Thomas Hyrkiel who saw the vision for the book from the moment we met. Thank you and to your team – we could not have done it without your amazing support!
We look forward to hearing from you. Please visit our website
Please send us your comments on The FinTech Book and let us know how you wish
to be engaged by dropping us a line at info@thefintechbook.com
Susanne Chishti
Janos Barberis
Twitter @susannechishti  Twitter @JNBarberisxiixiiAcknowledge Ments1Introduction1Financial Technology or FinTech is one of the most promising
At the end of 2015 Forbes  concluded:
1
This introduction provides a broad overview of the Financial
Technology sector by setting the scene and explaining what is actually meant by “FinTech”. These chapters serve as stepping stones paving the way towards the more specific topics that are covered in greater detail in The FinTech Book .
Moment
By Warren Mead
Fast-forward to the present day and both readers and publishers are in a very
The Shifting Financial Landscape
The implications for the traditional banking industry are immense. Developments
in FinTech have the potential to erode the brand equity of the incumbent players and eat into market share. But banks also have an opportunity to embrace FinTech innovation and offer new solutions to their customers.
An Unfinished Revolution
2
3
One of the single greatest obstacles is ubiquity – the consumer can be faced with a myriad ways to pay. We are now witnessing a global wave to introduce 24/7
The use of pre-paid cards is also on the rise. A 2012 report from MasterCard
4
predicts that the market for so-called e-money (cards pre-loaded with cash) will be
5 These figures are small when compared to the sums advanced by
the big banks but it is a young and rapidly growing market.
Some aspects of FinTech innovation remain well outside the mainstream.
6 potentially offer an opportunity and means
7
The Challenge to the Banks
8
for-global-prepaid-growth-by-2017.pdf.
cms/s/0/debe3f58-0bd8-11e5-a06e-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3eT1XUB4B.
Introduct Ion7committees). This approach speaks to a generation raised on social media and
The Future for the Banking Sector
BBVA chairman and CEO Francisco González forecast in early 2015 that up to half of the world’s banks will disappear through the cracks opened up by digital disruption of the industry.
"•	They take deposits and provide customers with a secure place to store cash and"
"•	They lend money."
The Utilities Risk
Unlike the major banks who are often constrained by legacy IT systems and
Introduct Ion9Why We’re so Excited About
FinTech
By Rébecca Menat
Banks are not exciting – FinTech is. Why should we be excited about the global
FinTech sector?
Here is some background information for novice readers: FinTech means “financial
How Did it all Begin?
FinTech Bring?
1 as there are start-ups
Another way of empowering people is to provide them with … money. The financial
crowdfunding.
2 Let us not forget that equity investment was once restricted
3 According to a report by consulting
4
3 See Part 6 for more information of FinTech influencing investment and capital trends.
4 See http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/18/investing/robo-advisor-millennials-wealthfront/.1010
Introduct IonGenerally – and I think this is the biggest revolution – FinTech is providing access
FinTech in the Developing World:
Starting from Scratch5
generate insights into the state of the FinTech industry: their conclusions are assembled in The Payments Innovation Jury Report.
6 Among various questions
7
9
5 For further information of the applicability of FinTech solutions to emerging markets and their
cloud.com/payments-innovation-2015.
7 Ibid.
Future of Fintech and Banking: Digitally disrupted or reimagined?
10 Accenture
details what it considers to be the most probable ones. Scenario 1: banks
http://www.fintechinnovationlablondon.net/media/730274/Accenture-The-Future-of-Fintech-
and-Banking-digitallydisrupted-or-reima-.pdf.1212
Introduct IonCurrent Trends in Financial
Technology
By Alexandre Glas
and Marcin Truszel
For a very long time now banks have had to compete primarily with other banks.
While the residents of developed countries certainly enjoy doing their banking
1 Source: https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/data-sharing-and-open-data-in-banking-
call-for-evidence/call-for-evidence-on-data-sharing-and-open-data-in-banking. The application
Regulation Supporting the
FinTech Sector
government announced the initiation of a data sharing and open data initiative in banking (open Application Programming Interface (API) initiative).
1 UK officials are
Another important piece of legislation in Europe is the Payment Services Directive
3 and is expected to grow
exponentially over the next 18 months.
banking industry. The forecast for shipping wearables in 2015 is 45.7m units4 and
5 For those of you
More and more financial services provision is being conducted online and as
6 In Europe some countries are already seeing bitcoin – an example
It is clear that FinTech has already made huge inroads into many aspects of
2 See https://www.weswap.com/en/.
3 See https://www.weswap.com/en/learn-more/.
.bobsguide.com/guide/news/2015/Jan/8/cryptocurrencies-made-legal-in-california
.html.1414
Introduct Ionexpect to see financial institutions rely increasingly on FinTech developments to
provide the solutions to keep us happy and meet our needs.
banking sector. We can probably assume that banking over the next 10 years will experience a higher degree of change than in the last 100 years. Financial technology innovation has started a global shake-up of the sector. Now the most important question remains: will banks be able to successfully embrace FinTech innovation or not? FinTech is set to play a bigger role in your life than you might have ever expected.
15Introduct IonFinTech
Themes2After the introduction to the financial technology sector in the previous
The flexibility of APIs means that it is also easier to create experiences that users
banks panicking about the challenges involved with overhauling their entire IT Banks Need to Think
Collaboration Rather Than Competition
By Rachel Nienaber
The financial sector has continued to witness many impressive innovations and
Application Programming Interface (API) is the term used to describe a set of tools
that enable different software components or systems to effectively communicate with one another.
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.20
FinTech The Mes20infrastructure in order to compete. The “us versus them” debate that has gained
Tech start-ups look at this financial services landscape and using the rationality
The growth of FinTech and push for open access to financial data has been noted
There is much to gain from FinTech firms and traditional banks embarking on a
FinTech The Mes21Global Compliance is Key
By Jan C. Wendenburg
If you have launched your FinTech company but disregarded compliance for your
FinTechs Must Understand Each
Local Regulatory Stack!
A key rule is that you should never try to bypass regulation. It’s much better to
Europe: Still Complex but with
Some Harmonized Regulations
Asia: Remains Very Fragmented
In India the regulation and supervision of the financial system has a complex multi-
In 2011 only about 35% of Indians over the age of 15 held an account at a formal
financial institution.
1 After a failed initiative to connect each household with a bank
Payment Services are Globally
Regulated
Adding payment services to your portfolio will trigger another set of strict
Local and Global Compliance –
FinTech The MesLending (Capital) in the 21st
Century
By Rodolfo Gonzalez
1
2 – but what if the actual potential is even larger? Lending holds the highest
Data and New Technologies are the
Key to Unlocking Credit Globally
Non-credit bureau-based underwriting is an area that shows great promise in the
1 See http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-6025.
2 See http://www.foundationcapital.com/admin/resources/whitepapers/p2p-lending-print-h-v20.pdf.25FinTech The Mes3 See http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-07-31/banks-face-hit-on-30-billion-in-
overdraft-fees-from-cfpb-rules.
Transaction Frequency
Most of the costs of holding and moving small balances will be stripped out of such
Near You
The current banking system is not equipped to carry out the challenging task
3 on automatic overdraft loans of less than
$30bn+ annually. One FDIC study found that the average consumer would pay an implied APR of 3520% on a $24 ATM overdraft (at the median overdraft fee of $34) – if the overdraft loan were paid back in two weeks.
FinTech The MesMarketplace lending platforms hold the key to making finance as significant and
27FinTech The MesThe Next Big Innovation in
FinTech – Identity
By Benjamin Wakeham
Identity is a key piece of global infrastructure which underpins every element of
Javelin Strategy & Research found that $16 billion was stolen from 12.7 million US
Some people argue that linking identity and payments leads to the loss of data
FinTech The Meswill be more comfortable with all things digital. Today’s kids will grow up. There will be
less and less separation between their digital life and their life in general.”
So let’s all jump aboard and set sail for a new world of digital identity and trust –
there are certain companies in existence trying to steady this ship:
Social Login
Twitter Digits
Apple Touch ID
Trulio
“Identity” is not a simple notion. People can have many different overlapping
The chief principle of a well-regulated police state is this: That each person shall be at
all times and places … recognised as this or the particular person.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1796)
The internet is currently something reminiscent of the Wild West. Except instead
index cards in a filing cabinet. Data being shared between entities to create a more holistic view of an individual or entity. It will be reputation rather than regulation that will animate trust in economic exchange. Politician Edmund Bohun in 1696 stated that there was no cash in England with the result that “no trade is managed but by trust”.
software applications. The API specifies how software components should interact. See the
FinTech The MesTech Giants Becoming
Non-Bank Banks
By Eric van der Kleij
The erosion of trust in retail banking is of course partly a function of banks’
You can see interesting signs of this in fluctuations in the value of bitcoin
But consider this: if traditional financial services providers reposition themselves
But is this really going to happen? The early signs suggest yes and the pace of
behavioural and thematic dimension.
A key contributor to the financial crisis was the poor origination and underwriting
The full extent of Facebook’s ambitions in financial services is only just starting to
But this model throws up the need for a whole new relationship of trust. The
There is a potentially huge volume of continuous data to be drawn from consenting
But things are never that simple and it is not all rosy for new entrants to the well-
But one thing is certain – technology will succeed. Technologists will learn quickly
Sceptics might ask one simple but pertinent question; can a new brand with
FinTech The Mesother provider of service to the financial consumer? From a purely branding
1
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.33FinTech The MesDesign is No Longer an
Option – User Experience  (UX) in FinTech
By Terry Cordeiro
FinTech Thought Leader
and Ivo Weevers
Design was previously an afterthought in the financial services sector. However
this has changed completely as financial services compete with the most famous consumer brands for customers. Good design is strategically important and also provides guidelines for good user experience (UX) in FinTech.
These types of conversations are not uncommon in the world of FinTech. In both
UX DESIGN = Big Bucks
The design change of a button increased a large online retailer’s annual revenue by $300 million.
1 Expedia increased profits by $12M by changing the design of their
registration process.2 And a recent report from venture capital firm Kleiner Perkin
technology and more about the experience and value they create for the user. Many FinTech companies have not yet fully embraced UX which can be a risk for product success. This chapter gives a brief introduction to UX in FinTech alongside guidelines from our own experiences which will hopefully push the thinking around the topic forward.
A Definition for UX
4 Its goal is
UX and FinTech
Over 15 million banking apps have been downloaded in the UK and almost 80% of bank customers use online or mobile banking at least once a month. Financial services are embracing the digital revolution. Financial organizations are starting to understand the crucial role of UX in the overall customer experience and brand loyalty. More and more have established internal design teams by hiring talent and acquiring UX agencies or UX-led tech companies. Capital One bank for instance has acquired top UX design agency Adaptive Path and UX-led personal finance app Level Money to quickly create an exceptional pool of internal design talents.
The nature of financial services however imposes specific challenges to designing
1 The $300 million button: http://www.uie.com/articles/three_hund_million_button.
.conversionvoodoo.com/blog/2011/11/expedia-deletes-one-field-from-their-registration-process-
www.kpcb.com/blog/design-in-tech-report-2015.
4 User Experience: http://www.nngroup.com/articles/definition-user-experience/. 3434
FinTech The MesAn Example: Password Fatigue
we are. This authentication often relies heavily on usernames and passwords. The problem is that secure passwords are both hard to create and hard to remember. On top of that we have multiple passwords and usernames.
"To give an indication the average person:•	Logs into different 10 sites/ mobile apps per day"
"•	Holds passwords to 30–40 sites."
like the first girlfriend’s name with her year of birth (laura1980). Easy to remember? Yes. Secure? No. The most secure would be to create a unique password for each site consisting of a long random combination of alphanumerics and symbols (KJ76RTnns!). Secure? Yes. Easy to remember? No. Poor UX? Definitely.
Seven Guidelines
have defined seven guidelines that have proven to be helpful in designing financial experiences.
1. Invest in design from the start and from the top
The twentieth-century marketing perspective of “making people want things”
has transitioned to a twenty-first-century approach of “making things people want”.
5 Design – with its focus on users – is the route through which brands will
a.
Dedicate money and time to design from the start;
c. Define clear business design objectives.
creative director. Many new successful tech companies such as AirBnB and Pinterest have designers as founders.
2. Understand all steps in the end-to-end experience
5 The secrets of the Chief Design Officer http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/secrets-
3. Marry design and engineering
6 Some
examples:
b.
4. Use design to speed up decision-making
Design techniques such as rapid prototyping maximize fast learning. They are used by Google Ventures’s Design Sprint
7 and the Build-Measure-Learn8 method.
5. Save costly development time
What started as a flow of 11 screens was simplified to six screens. Most screens
followed a similar layout. This not only resulted in a much simpler experience (a 100% sign-up success was achieved in beta test) but also in a much quicker development cycle:
a.
The development team needed to implement and fewer screens and error cases.
Hours of design iterations saved weeks of development work. Instilling design
practices from the start will save a lot of development work.
6. Aim at Uber-like simplicity with a high trust level
"•	Explain security measures: Personal finance tool Mint was one of the first to"
start by explaining clearly and upfront to users the encryption mechanisms it had put in place to guarantee data security.
"•	People forget passwords: This happens. Ensure the journey to reset their password is an integrated and simple part of the overall experience; this should never be an afterthought."
6 The 3 White Lies Behind Instagram’s Lightning Speed http://www.fastcodesign.com/1669788/
the-3-white-lies-behind-instagrams-lightning-speed.
7 Google Venture’s Design Sprint http://www.gv.com/sprint/.
8 Build-Measure-Learn method in “The Lean Startup” http://theleanstartup.com/.3636
"FinTech The Mes•	Let users control when sensitive data is displayed: A great new mobile"
7. Attractive things reduce errors
9 developed two forms of automated teller
a.
Fewer errors
b. Faster throughput
c. Fewer customer service requests
d. Fewer card blockages
the impact well-designed interfaces have on financial products and their customers.
Conclusion
9 Donald Norman (2005) Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things.37FinTech The MesFinTech Hubs3This part provides an overview of current and aspiring
FinTech “hubs” – the places where FinTech ecosystems are catalysed and growing. It gives real-world examples of the essential prerequisites for the establishment of FinTech centres around the world. It is a success story and checklist of what FinTech players have done right for their city (or country) to thrive in a globally competitive FinTech environment.
FinTech hubs42Nurturing New FinTech
Communities
By Claire Cockerton
Lessons from a Leader
Proximity and the creation of convening points provide an important focus for
London is also a beneficiary of negative circumstance. If necessity is the mother
These factors have all combined to create what is Europe’s most successful FinTech
The location of a FinTech hub cannot be underestimated. Historical and local
Actively encouraging employees to generate new concepts is not only great
It is with these dynamics in mind that we have mapped out the ingredients of
Connection
By Alain Clot
and Jean‐Michel Pailhon
FinTech Thought Leader
Are French entrepreneurs bad at creating successful FinTech companies? Renaud
Laplanche
What happened in the past is in the past. Today’s question should be: will the newly
emerging French‐born FinTech entrepreneurs have to migrate out of France to succeed in the FinTech space during the second half of the 2010s?France’s International Centre
of Excellence in Science and Technology
First of all France is widely known for the quality of its academic programmes in
It is generally expected that FinTech start‐ups that will succeed will do so thanks
6 and that Facebook launched its first Artificial 1 https://www.lendingclub.com/public/renaud‐laplanche.action.
2 http://www.xignite.com/market‐data/about/people/stephane‐dubois/.
3 http://www.fintechprofile.com/2015/04/15/philippe‐gelis‐kantox/.
4 http://www.bloomberg.com/research/stocks/people/person.asp?personId=23246193&ticker=E
BAY&previousCapId=27862&previousTitle=EBAY%2520INC.5 http://people.idsia.ch/~juergen/all.html.
opportunity_6.html.45FinTech hubsIntelligence (AI) Lab in Paris (first one outside of the US after those in Menlo Park
and New York).7
KPMG’s Competitive Alternatives report (2014) compared effective corporate tax
8
France also aims to attract international entrepreneurial talent. In achieving that
designed for non‐French entrepreneurs from all over the world who want to establish their start‐up in Paris: The French Tech Ticket.
10 Through this competitive
France’s Regulatory Environment
for Innovative Financial Services
France has also been rather quick to adapt to the “new deal of FinTech” from a regulatory
11
12 the latter initiative provides
France’s Strategic Business
and Geographic Positioning
France has a strong and highly diversified economy. Located at the heart of
7 http://newsroom.fb.comf/news/2015/06/introducing‐facebook‐ai‐research‐paris/.
8 http://www.gouvernement.fr/en/attractiveness‐productivity‐taxes‐10‐cliches‐about‐france‐
proved‐wrong‐once‐and‐for‐all.9 http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/countries/france/.
10 http://www.frenchtechticket.paris/.
11 http://www.amf‐france.org/en_US/Acteurs‐et‐produits/Prestataires‐financiers/Financement‐
participatif—crowdfunding/Cadre‐reglementaire.html?langSwitch=true.
12 http://www.fca.org.uk/news/innovation‐the‐regulatory‐opportunity.4646
France’s FinTech Start‐ups
Association
13
The challenges facing the financial industry are those of our entire economy. For this
FinTech is a major challenge for the development of innovative financial services for all; consumers have a stake in that new players jostle established players from the financial sector.
13 See www.francefintech.org/.47FinTech hubsThe Journey Towards an
Integrated FinTech  Ecosystem – The Netherlands
By Don Ginsel
Holland FinTech was launched in 2014 with the goal to build a FinTech ecosystem
But we are not there yet. There are still many hurdles to overcome for FinTech in
general. We do not consider ourselves experts in building FinTech ecosystems yet but think that sharing our journey may help others on a similar quest.
Netherlands in 2014
So how about start‐ups and tech companies? Were there really no companies
But there was one area where the Netherlands was already ahead of the FinTech
Seizing the Opportunity
After confirming that there is an opportunity with FinTech to drive competition and
FinTech hubswill financially empower entrepreneurs and consumers to deliver economic growth
and prosperity.
The First Step
Early Choices
One of the great things about working with (among others) start‐ups is their energy
Business Model
resources. That makes a win‐win for all parties involved. It also enables us to listen very carefully to our members and to tailor programmes to their current needs efficiently.
Governmental Relations
One very important development at the beginning of 2015 was the creation of
Execution Challenge
But of course our organization is still at the beginning stages. Bringing in
sufficient revenue remains a challenge when working with corporate partners. This also means that we work with a limited number of staff members and that we rely on part‐time and volunteer staff. Our team is extremely committed to building a vibrant FinTech community and has done a great job so far!
International Relevance
This story shares our journey in the FinTech landscape so far and our aim to
connect to other people and organizations who want to be a part of shaping the FinTech ecosystem worldwide. We hope this vision will give direction for an integrated ecosystem approach.5050
FinTech Hub?
By Nazim Faid
Luxembourg aspires to become one of the world’s major hubs for FinTech and it
If Luxembourg is presented as a serious contender to become a major hub for
The ability to innovate remains a major challenge to Luxembourg’s ambition. The
Banks can benefit from FinTech companies’ expertise not only for their self‐service
Many Luxembourg banks still lack the necessary infrastructure to face the global
Another major challenge for Luxembourg will be adopting flexible legislation
Although the present regulatory framework eases the integration of financial
The “Digital Lëtzebuerg” initiative is a clear demonstration of the government’s will
Luxembourg is without doubt becoming increasingly conscious of the challenge
The country is poised to swiftly adapt its already highly attractive regulatory
FinTech hubsVienna as the No. 1 FinTech
Hub in Mobile Payments?
By Sebastian Haas
and Reinhold Bierbaumer
London acquired its position as Europe’s FinTech centre at a very early stage.
One of the most significant arguments for Vienna’s competitive advantage is its
Table:  Starting basis – payment facts and figures
Austrian population 8.5m
Number of current accounts > 8.0m
AT banks customer base in CEE > 50m
Debit cards in AT (Bankomatkarte) 9.1m
Credit cards 2.9m
Smartphone penetration > 70%
On the one hand – and this is a significant change – policy‐makers have realized
start‐ups.
Specific Starting Basis for Mobile
Payments
The fact that Austrian banks have more than 50 million customers with current
accounts in the CEE region is also one of the reasons why Europe’s payment industry should watch the mobile payment innovations that are happening in Austria.
"•	SIM‐based secure element."
"•	All banks and all MNOs on board."
"•	Android phones only (due to Apple NFC policy)."
"•	Debit cards only (in 2015)."
"•	Credit cards in 2016."
What Does this Mean for FinTech
Start‐ups?
Austrian banks will give their customers the option to transfer their debit card
Local FinTech‐related Venture
Capital Environment
There’s a small but growing pool of venture capital (VC) in Austria. But who are
the relevant investors for FinTech start‐ups and what types of positioning and specialization are they fostering?5454
FinTech hubsA stable and crucial player in the local ecosystem is the Austria
Even family offices offer good development potential for ventures in Austria.
Austria‐based Speedinvest
and Venionaire scheduled closings of over €50 million in 2015.
Conclusion: Unlocking the
Potential
A successful mobile payment hub in Vienna will leverage an existing infrastructure
By Sukhi Jutla
FinTech Thought Leader
and Narendiran Sundararajan
1 across the spectrum. The socio‐
2 Online transactions are also on the rise; internet and mobile penetration
are close to 20% and 70% respectively3 and mobile internet users are forecast to
pass the 200 million mark.4 Both the public and the private sectors are reaching into
Innovation Areas
Jocata is another prominent FinTech company that offers Know‐Your‐Client (KYC)
6 it is clear that the world is willing to
invest in Indian start‐ups due to their obvious potential.
Traditional banks are perhaps feeling the heat from FinTech start‐ups as they see their
such as Snapdeal and Flipkart to launch a shopping site on its website to encourage customers to use their platforms in an attempt to reclaim fees from e‐commerce activity. The growing e‐commerce sector will continue to revolutionize the payments market as more people turn to the web to buy and sell products in this diverse country.
8 there has been a rise in the number of start‐ups in this space. For 1 Trak.IN Funding Tracker: http://trak.in/india‐startup‐funding‐investment‐2015/.
2 Knowledge@Wharton: http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/tapping‐an‐appetite‐for‐
technology‐in‐indias‐underserved‐markets/.
3 Time: http://time.com/3611863/india‐smartphones/.
4 The Hindu: http://www.thehindu.com/sci‐tech/technology/gadgets/mobile‐internet‐users‐to‐
reach‐213‐million‐by‐june‐2015/article6785327.ece.
5 See http://yourstory.com/2015/07/bankbazaar‐com‐funding‐seriesc/.6 See http://www.jocata.com/news.html.
7 E27: http://e27.co/banks‐gear‐up‐to‐piggyback‐on‐the‐e‐commerce‐wave‐20150526/.
8 YourStory: http://yourstory.com/2015/05/foodtech‐startups‐india‐crowdpitch/.56
to host a dinner party or be a guest. Guests will pay a set amount per meal and hosts are charged a minimum subscription fee and a sign‐up fee to use the platform.
A Collective Hub
10 cementing the success stories of
The number of financial hubs in the country is also on the rise. In research
13
9 YourStory: http://yourstory.com/2015/07/half‐year‐2015‐funding‐report/.
10 TheNextWeb: http://thenextweb.com/in/2015/07/05/india‐the‐worlds‐fastest‐growing‐startup‐
ecosystem/.
11 MasterCard: http://www.mastercard.com/us/company/en/newsroom/pr_new_mastercard_
research_ranks_65_Cities_in_emerging_markets.html.12 ASSOCHAM: http://assocham.org/newsdetail.php?id=4210.
13 Economic Times: http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/articleshow/46127416.cms?utm_
source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst.
Southeast Asia
By Markus Gnirck
and Gerben Visser
Drivers of FinTech in Singapore
While FinTech is a global movement that has gained a lot of traction and
Another key driver of FinTech in Singapore is the conducive business environment.
The heavy involvement of the Monetary Authority of Singapore (“MAS”) in FinTech
Singapore’s FinTech Ecosystem
These market participants in Singapore have a privileged glimpse into the
Another exciting opportunity for FinTech in Singapore is using synergies across
Success Stories
them share a common factor in having a representative/unitary organization lifting up and supporting the entire FinTech ecosystem in their respective economies.
and “Holland FinTech” in the Netherlands are some well‐established examples of such organizations while “FinTech HK” in Hong Kong and “The Singapore FinTech Consortium” in Singapore are quickly establishing their presence and building the FinTech community in their respective economies too.
Conclusion
FinTech hubs60Emerging
Engine That Can
By Susan Joseph
Most emerging market economies have limited financial system infrastructure.
It would be foolish to think the unbanked are not engaging in financial transactions.
Kenya has enviable mobile FinTech solutions that developed countries can only
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact66The sheer volume and total amount of money transfers and big data generated
Will digital money fully replace cash? Probably not. But the widespread reach of
We are about to enter the second stage of this revolution as feature phones are
The first creative idea is a credit insurance product that will be introduced in
Imagine the economic landscape of a poor country with solidly growing small
1 Data that can be shown to investors trying to
improve the country’s economy and infrastructure. Data that can trigger further investment because that data proves that the investment in small businesses is working.
This is an example of how FinTech can create a voice that can be measured for the
The second example takes place in Kenya. Kenya is enjoying around 6% GDP growth
What exactly can this mobile technology do? Everything that would traditionally be
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact67etc. All of these financial instruments can be accessed with the swipe of your finger
One of the more interesting lessons to be learned from emerging economies is
that strong and powerful mobile tools and technologies have developed free of the stranglehold of legacy financial systems and siloed technology and regulation. It is much easier to innovate when you can start from scratch.
What has occurred to date is only the beginning. Marketplace lending is coming and
FinTech has thrown down the gauntlet. The challenge is on to move emerging
It is “I think I can” at its best.68
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact68Why Am I Not Gonna Be Able
to Enter a Bank?
By Francisco Meré Palafox
“It is so far away and I waste so much time and money to cash my paycheck. Once I
population) are excluded from the formal financial system.
1 The story of M‐Pesa in
2
4 Mexico has also been
5 In
Supply‐side Factors
Seven large players that hold 90% of the market by most measures dominate the banking system in Mexico. All these banks have launched digital and mobile
org/wp‐content/uploads/2014/12/2014_g20_financial_inclusion_action_plan.pdf.
2 International Telecommunications Union.
2015.http://www.bis.org/press/p150316.htm.
9
10 The regulations
allow for a “not‐present” account opening process with reduced information requirements and no paper documents.
11 The potential for offering access to
In that environment there is only one branchless bank in Mexico. Bankaool is
12 Their platform has been designed with a digital enrolment
Demand Factors
wanna get out immediately…”13
“My ideal bank would be one where there are no preferred clients.”14
According to a report on financial inclusion by the Mexican banking supervisory
16 How can
financial institutions have access to the payment system. All savings accounts or stored value
accounts that are open‐loop must be backed by an account at a regulated financial institution.
10 At the current exchange rate of 15.5 MXN per US$.
of households in Mexico have a monthly income equal to or less than this.
14 Ibid.
ments/Reportes%20de%20IF/Reporte%20de%20Inclusion%20Financiera%206.pdf.
financialinclusion/country/mexico.70
and financial inclusion.17 Such research shows that we can be “nudged” into saving
One area where FinTech and mobile banking will marry behavioural economics is
FinTech can thus play an important role in the adoption of these instruments as The
Economist recently pointed out:
18
Mexico is a country where poverty and income inequality prevail. The country
20
Seventy‐two per cent of people believe that banks are only interested in rich clients and 67% believe they take advantage of the needs of people.
22
The relationship between financial inclusion and economic development has now
blogs/freeexchange/2014/09/commitment‐savings‐accounts.
userfiles/files/Enadis‐2010‐RG‐Accss‐002.pdf.
metrica.php?cp=4555.
userfiles/files/Reporte%20D‐CREDITO‐Web_INACCSS.pdf.17 Dean Karlan at Yale University has conducted extensive research on the topic. See further
http://karlan.yale.edu.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact71The Rise of the Rest in FinTech
By Stefano L. Tresca
Would you like to have 2.5 billion customers?This is the number of “unbanked” – adults who do not use banks or microfinance
1
What Goes Around Comes Around
There is another benefit that is too often forgotten: thanks to the Rise of the Rest new cakes are baked in our own countries too.
Try to Google “prepaid meter” – the prepaid system for electricity. If you are based
1 http://graphics.wsj.com/billion-dollar-club/.72
The most popular prepaid system at the time was inserting coins in your electricity
There is Something New Under
the Sun
Developing countries have large masses of new customers and few resources
What is Really Happening?
Here are a few successful examples:
"•	Ezetap (India)"
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact73Just one city – Mumbai – has 12 million citizens. Many of these customers are
2 This was solely to finance the opening of a
surprises that come to light when reading the South China Morning Post or Tech in Asia.Conclusion
The so‐called “developing countries” are not just a market that provides customers and resources to Western companies; they form the base of innovation and investments. They can create disruptive technologies that we can later see transposed in Europe and the US.
You may believe that the Rise of the Rest is going to compete for our piece of
windmills.”
2 http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/welab-raises-us160m-in-series-b-financing-from-
khazanah-and-ing-bank-300207716.html.74
Education – Helping the Unbanked Reach Financial Inclusion
By Cesar Jimenez Richardson
Converging trends hold great promise for the next generation of digital money
2
What will this shift from feature phones to smartphones mean for the unbanked? At
Enhancing User Experience
Since smartphone operating systems offer a common platform for developers –
App‐based mobile money services will also allow providers not only to tap into new
.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp‐content/uploads/2015/03/SOTIR_2014.pdf.
2 Ibid.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact75consumers with useful insights that help them make better decisions and take
control of their finances.
Many unbanked people in developing countries face limited access to micro‐
5 This makes alternative savings propositions attractive to
6 PFM application that can be customized and integrated with
Education: Power to the People
through Financial Literacy
New Product Development
community will require easier access to the existing money rails network through the use of open Application Programming Interfaces (APIs).
4 While in‐house product
Personal Financial Management (PFM) applications provide an instructive example
channels. The first is the network of physical access points where customers can typically
SOTIR_2014.pdf.
6 “White‐label” refers to FinTech firms which offer their solutions to banks so that banks can
brand the solution with their own brand name (i.e. banks’ clients would not realize that the service has not been developed by the bank itself but by one of its FinTech suppliers).76
Strategies to gain mass‐market adoption require industry stakeholders to identify
Another tactic could be to use real customers who are also active MMS users to act
The Road Ahead
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact77The Social Impact of FinTech
in Nigeria
By Daniel Steeves
the technology advances of the past thirty years – and exponentially more since the turn of the century. The growing use of social media at all ages of the population is just one significant example of this change. Throughout all of this Nigerians – and the rest of the world – are really still just adjusting to a state of mind where online transactions do not pose a security risk.
From the Nigerian perspective this also provides a critical juncture to change
perceptions across the global community by demonstrating not only the value and opportunities to connect with West African markets but also that doing so can be secure and fraud‐free.
Members of the younger generations are being brought up in a society where mobile
as great risks to working with and within countries like Nigeria and have been missing great opportunities to trade and transact with these strong and emerging economies.
Secure and fraud‐checked online transactions are only part of the value delivered:
Contributions to State Monetary
Policies
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact78accepting lower margins – on high‐volume transaction areas like cross‐border
FinTech is contributing to the national economy of Nigeria and supporting Central
country to leverage the financial and economic strength being delivered by FinTech to enable a growing maturity of fiscal policies and to seize a true leadership role.
But this doesn’t mean that there is incompatibility between regulation and rapid
is a becoming a completely different story.Support for Small Business and
Entrepreneurs
Reducing both fraud and bad debts in turn keeps the cost of lending lower which
It is a common thread throughout emerging economies that there is a limited
FinTech start‐ups support businesses – and other start‐ups – ranging from market
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact79Business as Usual is a Thing of
the Past
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact80India and the Pyramid of
Opportunity
By Maneesh Bhandari
CK Prahalad’s oft‐cited notion states that there is a fortune to be made at the
2 In 2015
3 Online transactions are also on the
4 with mobile internet users touted to cross the 200 million mark.5 These
1 Approximate figures from McKinsey Forecasts for 2015: https://genesis.iitm.ac.in/downloads/
resources/startup/tracking%20the%20growth%20of%20indian%20middle%20class.pdf.2 Knowledge@Wharton: http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/tapping‐an‐appetite‐for‐
technology‐in‐indias‐underserved‐markets/.
3 World Bank: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/21865/WPS7255.
pdf?sequence=2.
4 Time: http://time.com/3611863/india‐smartphones/.
5 The Hindu: http://www.thehindu.com/sci‐tech/technology/gadgets/mobile‐internet‐users‐to‐
Upper Middle Class
Middle Class
Lower Middle Class
Vulnerable Groups
Figure:  The pyramid of opportunity
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact81that provides speech analytics and voice biometrics to financial enterprises in order
to facilitate easy verification and critical information transfer to rural communities in 11 regional languages. These are examples of where challenges in lending and interaction with underserved communities are seen as opportunities that could be bridged by FinTech ideas and technology.
Investment interests in the country are also growing. Venture capital from foreign
6 This interest from foreign investments
8
9 The RBI in particular has undertaken various steps to ensure
10 and increasing lending caps for MFIs.11
SEBI announced in 2015 its relaxation of norms and its move to establish an alternative trading platform for start‐ups dealing in online trading.
12 This move
13 The government‐led Pradhan Mantri Jan
6 CB Insights: https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/india‐venture‐capital‐tech‐funding/.7 The Next Web: http://thenextweb.com/in/2015/07/05/india‐the‐worlds‐fastest‐growing‐startup‐
ecosystem/.
8 CB Insights: https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/india‐active‐venture‐capital‐firms‐2014/.
9 Economic Times: http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/policy/india‐secures‐
top‐most‐rating‐for‐financial‐market‐regulations/articleshow/47632065.cms.
10 Trak.in: http://trak.in/tags/business/2014/12/09/rbi‐cancel‐2fa‐smaller‐ecommerce‐
transactions/.
11 LiveMint: http://www.livemint.com/Industry/LM4OfETppTduXTLQD6BovL/RBI‐eases‐lending‐
norms‐for‐microfinance‐companies.html.
12 Reuters: http://in.reuters.com/article/2015/06/23/india‐sebi‐board‐idINKBN0P319K20150623.
13 MediaNama: http://www.medianama.com/2015/02/223‐npci‐initiates‐ecosystem‐for‐unified‐
payments‐interface/.82
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact82Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) is another mission of financial inclusion in both urban and
14 Aadhar (universal identity) and know‐your‐customer
15 The government has also set up
differentiated banking systems in the form of payment banks to provide low cost and easier banking to the underserved communities.
The public and private sectors playing off each other’s actions have directly
16 Telecommunication developments such as Reliance Jio Infocomm
with it fresh challenges to be addressed and thereby creating new opportunities that could enable us to see the pyramid as an aid to the development of the economy of the country.
15 Aadhar UID: http://aadhaarcarduid.org/category/direct‐cash‐transfer‐scheme/.16 Business‐Standard: http://www.business‐standard.com/article/pti‐stories/mudra‐bank‐bill‐
likely‐in‐fwinter‐session‐115070300655_1.html.14 PMJDY: http://pmjdy.gov.in/.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact83FinTech
Solutions5This fifth part of the book summarizes the latest FinTech
solutions for both established corporate players and consumers. Business-to-business (B2B) solutions have been divided into those that strategically help banks to maintain their leading roles in financial services and solutions focused on either helping incumbents to be more efficient and compliant or more secure and better equipped to make holistic trading decisions.
Business-to-consumer (B2C) solutions include
Forward for B2B Supply Chains
By David Desharnais
Thomas Edison did not invent the light bulb. Like so many visionaries before
1 as well as the
3
Complex Commerce
B2B commerce networks enhance collaboration between buyers and suppliers.
This integration of available B2B commerce networks is certainly a step in the right
1 http://www.thepaypers.com/ecommerce/world‐ecommerce‐registers‐23‐6‐increase‐
in‐2013/757853‐25.
2 http://www.prnewswire.com/news‐releases/us‐b2b‐e‐commerce‐companies‐will‐generate‐1‐
trillion‐in‐sales‐in‐2014‐eclipsing‐b2c‐e‐retailing‐market‐four‐times‐over‐280776882.html.3 http://www.practicalecommerce.com/articles/85970‐B2B‐Ecommerce‐Growing‐Becoming‐
More‐Like‐B2C.
4 http://v1.aberdeen.com/launch/report/benchmark/8671‐RA‐accounts‐payable‐automation.asp.
5 Ardent Partners Annual State of Procurement Report.88
commerce have fundamental differences.
the B2B chain – payments – remains hampered by a plethora of costly variables.
The Payment Problem
And what about the potential for change after a payment has been made? More
than 60%
6 of B2B transactions require manual intervention as new business
8 The Single European Payments Area (SEPA) format has the same
challenge. Hardly adequate for the complex data required for describing a basic B2B transaction – let alone if some variable changes somewhere in the transaction lifecycle. This issue is exacerbated by cross‐border transactions where financial systems do not speak the same language and lose even more data in translation.
9
7 Ibid.8 http://www.pymnts.com/in‐depth/2014/b2b‐payments‐are‐antiquated‐and‐starving‐for‐data/#.
VZWHJkY__R4.
most businesses still have little control or visibility of the status of
their payment processes – and the consequences are staggering78%
OF COMP ANIES CAN’T
FORECAST SHORT -TERM
CASH FLOW WITHIN
5% ACCURACYOF CFOS REPORT ISSUES
CAUSED BY POOR
VISIBILITY AND CONTROL
OF SUPPLIER P AYMENTSOF P AYMENTS ARE
HANDLED MANUALL Y
CAUSING UP TO 25%
P AYMENT MISMA TCHESOF B2B INVOICES ARE
P AID AFTER THE DUE
P AYMENT PERIOD AGREED
(USUALL Y 30 DAYS)59% >60% >30%
to make payments – half of which must be handled manually.11 With the average
12 the time and money involved in
A Broken System
This array of variables in B2B transactions underscores the fact that business
Dynamic Payments
The first step for those seeking to bring about a state of B2B nirvana has been to
10 Source: The Hackett Group (as reported in the Purchase to Pay Manifesto from Basware).
11 http://downloads.tradeshift.com/Ardent%20Partners%20‐%20ePayables%202014%20‐%20
The%20Quest.pdf.
12 Top priorities for AP in 2014 – Ardent Partners. Figure:  Elements of a dynamic payments platformDYNAMIC PAYMENTS PLATFORM
CORE BANKING
SYSTEM
SAFE AND SECURE—
MEETS AND EXCEEDS
BANKING STANDARDSDYNAMIC PAYMENTS.
ADAPTS ON-THE-FL Y
TO THE BUSINESSSMART PAYMENTS.
TRACK AND TRACERICH DATA
ATTACHMENTSWORKFLOW
INTEGRATION90
FinTech Solu TionS90Such software solutions are empowering businesses to adapt to all the potential
By utilizing event‐driven workflow engines that connect to existing B2B commerce
The net result for the first businesses to turn to these platforms has been greater
FinTech Solu TionS91Payments and Point of Sales
(POS) Innovation
By Rube Huljev
“Merchants have no country. The mere spot they stand on does not constitute so strong
an attachment as that from which they draw their gains.”
Thomas Jefferson
It was 13 February 1601 when James Lancaster slowly raised the anchor of the Red
The merchant’s situation has changed too. Once those with the biggest warehouse
But one thing is constant and it is hard-wired from the trade of ancient times until
And here we come to the main reason why pure play digital merchants are not a
FinTech Solu TionS92And this small unrecognized fact is a saviour of the smart banks. Real-time
Transaction
and the merchants.
Customer
So we do agree that the customer is right at the top of the food chain.
Bank
term commitments. There will be no winner in the race to the bottom with fees per transaction – learn your lessons from the telecom world.
The real winners will differentiate themselves with services on top of transactions
FinTech Solu TionS93Merchants
Merchants want more profit. Merchants want new customers. Merchants want to
Building Blocks of the New Bank
POS as the Preferred Touch-point
Data
There are many companies that know a whole lot about customer behaviour in the digital world. There are very few that can construct a customer context in the physical environment. Banks are one of those few.
B2B2C Automated Personalization SaaS1 for
Merchants and Consumers
Remember that centuries-old wisdom which still stands and always will in the world
of commerce – the mere spot a merchant stands on (his bank and his taxman) does not constitute as strong an attachment as that from which they draw their gains (their customer’s wallet).
And finally we come to an underlying conclusion – he who holds the loyalty and
Will banks need to transform into technology marketing agencies? Will business
The new Golden Age of Sail has begun. Are you building lean and fast ships?
1 Software as a Service.94
FinTech Solu TionS94Predictive Algorithms –
Building Innovative Online Banking Solutions
By Jan Michael Auer
Jakob Etzel
Georg Heiler
Martin Prebio
The idea is to bring these two observations together. Historical transaction data
Background
A sector that has long been looked at as performing very badly in the field of
Banks and insurance companies have in the past offered both consulting services
The aforementioned broader background forces banks to increasingly transform
their business models and find or acquire new forms of revenue streams. Now we will take a closer look at the two main observations behind this chapter.
Financial literacy was long seen as a guarantor that retail customers would use the
1
of whom 44% use online banking.3 According to author interviews with bank
The Austrian market leader in online banking innovation at the moment is ERSTE
Bank
Online account
opening
Target saving
Rounding
saving
Automatic
categorization
Manual
categorization
Personal
finance
managerCommunication channels with bank advisor additional to mail & phone Additional features
Raiffeisen X X 1 Branches Cash flow forecast for the next month
Overbank Branches
Volksbank (x) Branches
EasyBank Mail/phone only
Santander (x) Mail/phone only
ING DiBa X 4 Mail/phone only
Deniz Bank (x) Mail/phone only
Number 26 X X X 4 Mail/phone only
(2) Aggregation only(3) Visualization of the past and monthly statistics (“Snapshot”)(4) Only visualization of historic cash flowsTable:  Online banking features96
FinTech Solu TionS96Private Customer Cash Flow
Forecasts
private customers’ current accounts. The forecasts will be made by predictive algorithms and will be based on the historical transaction data available at the bank. The prediction is done without any user interaction and is part of the customers’ online banking profile. The forecasts are planned to be delivered as “software as a service” and to be implemented as a white‐label solution (a product or service produced by one company (the producer) and rebranded by other companies (the marketers)).
Transaction clustering is at the core of such forecasting. Each cluster can be
"•	Counterpart"
"•	Sign (income or expense)"
"•	Geolocation."
Time series clustering (shown in the following Figure) can also be based on
4 but transaction data usually have enough inherent structure
to fit the above‐mentioned parameters.
The standard model generates median and 0.05/0.25/0.75/0.95 quantiles.
"•	ATM withdrawal simulation by Hidden Markov models"
"•	Hierarchical time series (e.g. with nested transaction categories forming the"
hierarchy)
"•	Copulae to simulate the influence of an event on multiple clusters and the clusters’ interdependencies."
5 Oracle
6
Research and Testing
4 Georg Heiler. Clustering von Zeitreihen. Ein Uberblick über Anwendungen von Zeitreihen‐
6 http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/options/advanced‐analytics/odm/index.html.Figure:  Time series clusteringforall clusters by counterpart do
if length of cluster < 2 then
add cluster to rest cluster;
else
decide on model;
calculate daily cluster estimates;
process rest cluster with ARIMA model;
calculate daily rest cluster estimates;aggregate all estimates;
FinTech Solu TionS97The predictive algorithms were tested on seven years of historical transaction
Thoughts on Business
and Integration
Figure:  Integration examples
Table:  Pricing structures
Strategy User pays for Vendor delivers Target
Free for all Free API + graphics Get new
customers
3rd party plug‐in Yearly
subscriptionAPI + graphics Get customers to
pay for service
Freemium Premium feature API + graphics Get customers to
pay for service
Integrationinto PFMYearly subscriptionAPI Enhancing PFM with prediction
7 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
The pricing structure shown in the Table above7 can follow usual software‐as‐a‐
service models:
"•	An up‐front fee is paid for the installation of the system. Due to data protection"
requirements there will be the need to deploy in a high‐security data centre or directly at bank premises. There is also a need for high customization.98
"FinTech Solu TionS98•	A monthly or quarterly provisioning fee can be set quite low and ensures basic"
Applying Predictive Analytics
to SMEs
"The following figures could be interesting to predict:•	Cash flows"
"•	The impact of volatile currency exchange rates"
instruments/hedges for specific products or currencies.
Providing powerful interfaces can enable the prediction platform to interact with a range of external data sources:
"•	Macroeconomic data. System users can be asked to give additional data such"
Conclusions
The buzzword “treasury as a service” summarizes a couple of interesting leads
A successful roll‐out of private customer cash flow forecasts will be the first milestone
on the journey to make predictive algorithms available to every bank customer.
FinTech Solu TionS99Big Data is the Cornerstone
of Regulatory Compliance Systems
By Thierry Duchamp
Many financial institutions have been adapting their existing information systems
This chapter shows how big data technologies can make risk and compliance
As big data technology has progressively evolved from its beginnings in the web
Has Been too Slow
Could “Internet Big Data” Have
Been Directly Applied to Banks?
"•	Big data architecture is a drastic change of paradigm—implementation requires"
"•	The internet use cases mostly differ from enterprise use cases."
"•	Marketing"
"•	Know Your Customer (KYC)"
"•	Fraud detection.100"
FinTech Solu TionS100Compliance systems need both data consistency and real‐time accuracy to cope
How Can Real‐time and Consistent
Data be Obtained from Big Data Technology?
Combining real‐time and data consistency for big data is an engineering challenge
"•	Unlimited storage"
"•	Unlimited processing capabilities"
"•	Unlimited caching capabilities."
Time synchronization across the cluster is the secret to providing full lockless data
Best Technology to Implement Compliance Systems
external systems:
"•	Trading systems"
"•	Market data"
"•	Referential and CRM"
"•	External financial data"
"•	Real‐time and historical news"
"•	And many others."
Lack of Flexibility
Flexibility
FinTech Solu TionS101Big data technologies propose a disruptive approach regarding data schema
"•	A data schema implemented on top of a meta‐model;"
"•	“Schema on read” able to smartly rely on several versions of this data schema;"
"•	“Schema on read” also able to automatically trigger types conversions."
This hybrid approach drastically reduced the usual costs for implementing a
Elasticity and Scalability
Elasticity and scalability are the main disruptions brought about by big data technologies. Enabling a real lockless distributed architecture allows a big data application to offer limitless:
"•	Data storage"
"•	Processing capabilities"
"•	Caching (in‐memory)."
happened to the web industry:
"•	To what degree of complexity will data evolve?"
"•	How fast will data grow?"
"•	Will it need more processing power (e.g. valuation)?"
"•	Will it need to be quicker (e.g. Dodd‐Frank and Clearing House)?Combining Internal and External Data"
An efficient compliance system must be able to combine data that the
"•	Data from banks’ transactions systems"
"•	Data from external company directories to verify the shareholders"
"•	OFAC and similar lists"
"•	Web search results about stakeholders."
"•	Detect that shareholders are the same people as those mentioned in web search"
"•	Compute a reputation score by text‐mining the web;"
"•	Use machine learning for weak signal detection or fraud pattern detection on account transactions."
Enhance Traditional Approaches
"•	Store huge amounts of data and unlimited history depth;"
"•	Execute complex algorithms in real time;102"
"FinTech Solu TionS102•	Keep most used data in a fast‐distributed cache (i.e. in‐memory);"
"•	Keep costs very reasonable (mid‐range servers are used)."
These approaches give excellent results for extracting hidden information in
The hybrid approach of feeding a rules engine with indicators provided by a big data
Audit Everything
online. Archiving becomes easier as storage capability is unlimited: fine‐grained with unlimited history depth.Figure:  Big data approach to combining internal and external data
Source: Scaled Risk
FinTech Solu TionS103Successful Project Implementation
system needs a set of prerequisites and best practices.
Intermediate Components are Needed
Another lesson learned: components that are publicly available do not necessarily
years of time to market with our integrated platform:
"•	A flexible multi‐version data schema for fast data collection."
"•	Real‐time event‐driven technology at the heart of the architecture."
"•	Consistent reporting capabilities thanks to distributed and real‐time online"
analytical processing (OLAP).
"•	Full audit view with as of data view capabilities."
"•	Data visualization components."
Figure:  Hadoop framework
Source: Scaled Risk
104
FinTech Solu TionS104Using such a solution is likely to allow you to spend extra time and money on
actually implementing compliance rules and controls.
Use an Open System
An open system is also about being able to extend or modify rules and data source.
The technologies used to do this must be standard and open so you can easily find expert resources on the job market.End‐to‐end Project Implementation
FinTech Solu TionS105FinTech Solutions in Complex
Contracts Optimization
By Akber Datoo
Decades of neglect are coming home to roost. In an increasingly regulated and
Regulators globally were shocked by this state of affairs. They imposed multiple
The big data excitement is all about seeing and understanding the relations within
The initial challenge lies in simply ensuring that technology can be used to assist.
FinTech Solu TionS106Even the application of some basic classification algorithms to the electronic
Finding the contracts is only the beginning of the battle. Whilst the lawyer may still
Validation: data values cannot be viewed in isolation. A legal contract and
The positive feedback to cleanse the accuracy of the legal data also forces the
The infrastructure also allows not only better understanding of the current position
The application of FinTech need not end with the analysis and control over the
108
FinTech Solu TionS108Behavioural Biometrics – A
New Era of Security
By Neil Costigan
1
You do not have to look too far back in the news headlines to see evidence of a
Biometrics has stepped in as a potential solution to this problem. From a technology
Behavioural Biometrics
first_quarter.
Machine learning algorithms build up a unique picture of the user – not what they
Security and Usability
The trend towards mobile banking means that the time taken up by security
Pragmatism and Perception
Another interesting factor to bear in mind is the importance of user perception
FinTech Solu TionS110Security alone is never going to be the driving factor that encourages a customer
capital‐markets/banking‐2020/assets/pwc‐retail‐banking‐2020‐evolution‐or‐revolution.pdf.
FinTech Solu TionS111Ultra‐Fast Text Analytics in
Trading Strategies
By Markus Schicho
and Karin Hodnigg
and drastically. And social media can be even more relevant when it comes to the immediacy of the impact.
Figure:  Twitter stock prices affected by news
NASDAQ prematurely tweets
about TWTR's profit warning
Twitter forced to
publish quarterly results
28.04.2015 09:3028.04.2015 09:4528.04.2015 10:0028.04.2015 10:1528.04.2015 10:3028.04.2015 10:4528.04.2015 11:0028.04.2015 11:1528.04.2015 11:3028.04.2015 11:4528.04.2015 12:0028.04.2015 12:1528.04.2015 12:3028.04.2015 12:4528.04.2015 13:0028.04.2015 13:1528.04.2015 13:3028.04.2015 13:4528.04.2015 14:0028.04.2015 14:1528.04.2015 14:3028.04.2015 14:4528.04.2015 15:0028.04.2015 15:1528.04.2015 15:3028.04.2015 15:4529.04.2015 09:3029.04.2015 09:4529.04.2015 10:0029.04.2015 10:1529.04.2015 10:3029.04.2015 10:4529.04.2015 11:0029.04.2015 11:1529.04.2015 11:3029.04.2015 11:4529.04.2015 12:00112
FinTech Solu TionS112Listed companies are required to publish their financial results quarterly. These
News beyond a mere result announcement is far more challenging. Take for
Real‐time Impact
Profit warnings that miss or exceed targets can fiercely and immediately impact stock
profits) lasts about 40 seconds .
1 This means traders have less than a minute to read
The News Impact Triangle
Automatic Text Analysis
Fundamentals
Indicators
cbsnews.com/news/the‐impact‐of‐news‐events‐on‐market‐prices.
Events and Investment Decisions
Since the identification of rating events is possible – how about the identification of
Sentiments and Opinion Mining
Figure:  Annotated text
Source: ATRAP
114
FinTech Solu TionS114Figure:  ATRAP screenshot – a successful trade after information extraction
Source: ATRAP
to be of use. Repeated media coverage of a topic is more likely to have an impact
Figure:  Sentiment analysis example
Source: lingrep.com
allows two different assessments (growing/stalling outlook) to be assigned to the corresponding stock.
Innovative Technologies in the
Financial Market – a Critical View
The potential of automated text analysis in news trading is immense. Although
But there is no alternative to innovation when one is aiming for success.Figure:  Greece tweet assessment
Source: twiction.lingrep.com
Applications for Automated Text
Analysis
FinTech Solu TionS116Regulated Crowdfunding
Ecosystems
By Oscar A. Jofre
Regulated crowdfunding is where an online portal is used to sell securities (shares
It is important for all the participants in the regulated crowdfunding ecosystem to
The following Figure shows the participants of the ecosystem and some of their
responsibilities.
The goal of the ecosystem is to help the issuer and investor come together in
the most efficient manner through the regulated crowdfunding portals.  Below are more details about each of the participants that need to work together on a global scale.
Securities Commissions are mandated by their respective governments to enforce
Figure:  Crowdfunding ecosystem participants and responsibilities
Source  : Koreconex
FinTech Solu TionS117One of the key reasons why regulated crowdfunding is a global phenomenon is the
Accredited investors are those investors deemed by the Securities Commissions
Examples of countries that have been very progressive in allowing non‐accredited
investors to invest in companies through the regulated crowdfunding portals are:
Regulated crowdfunding portals bring issuers and investors together. It sounds
The most successful regulated crowdfunding portals globally have very similar
The participants in the background provide technology and services to the entire
The regulated crowdfunding ecosystem is possible today because of these four key
pillars:
1.
Technology
2. Internet
3. Social media
4. Progressive governments.
The nature of these markets and the way business is done can change rapidly
Regulated crowdfunding uses the four pillars and brings together all the
Third‐party providers are also very important in the ecosystem. Think of them as
FinTech Solu TionS119Remittances – International FX
Payments at Low Cost
By Michael David Wolper
“Digital Natives” and “Digital
Immigrants”
The “natives” versus “immigrants” distinction is mostly about perspective. An
One way to remedy this is by giving customers the option to bank over mobile
The Power of Remittances
1 What is
FinTech Solu TionS120Economist Dilip Ratha describes the promise of remittances as “dollars wrapped
But while the majority of funds sent home go towards helping family members with
2 And these
Millennial Outreach
The Future of Banking
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press‐release/2014/10/06/remittances‐developing‐countries‐five‐percent‐conflict‐related‐migration‐all‐time‐high‐wb‐report.
FinTech Solu TionS121feature phones and smartphones are making their way into the hands of consumers
everywhere.
Young people are likely to outgrow cash. The practical timetable for this to
It is easy to see why many analysts maintain the belief that cash is here to stay.
CardAdvisors‐CashlessSociety.pdf.122
FinTech Solu TionS122FinTech Solutions for Small
Businesses
By Luke Hally
Who would have thought that the combination of finance and technology could
The traditional financial players get a lot of press time in FinTech‐related news:
1 Disruption is not
The record holders in finance have been playing for a long time and have amassed
Power in the market means the control of supply and distribution of goods or
Small and medium‐sized enterprises (SMEs) are the key beneficiaries of disruptive
FinTech Solu TionS123The government will draw on a $500 million Premier’s Jobs and Investment Fund
to support high‐priority initiatives. With these factors and support it is no surprise Melbourne is the home of a wide range of FinTech start‐ups servicing SMEs.
Good financial advice can make or break an SME. A qualified adviser can fill gaps
are getting paid. Civilizations have been using money as a transactional device since around 600
BC. Payment for goods and services in a face‐to‐face transaction
is straightforward. You make your payment and receive your goods. Receiving payment where the customer is remote is a problem as old as business itself. Customers are hesitant to pay before receiving goods or services and businesses are hesitant to provide them before they receive payment.
This throws into sharp relief the need for competition and the need for disruption of
User context is something that is particularly important for SME tools. The lack
FinTech Solu TionS124Payment Solutions Including
Apple Pay
By Denis Thomas
“Are P2P Payments next for Apple Pay?”
“Roger Federer slams Wimbledon all‐white dresscode.”“Pluto shows its spots to NASA probe.”
These are some of the headlines captured from some of the well‐established
"•	Timing is critical to news but is it to entrepreneurs? Would timing play the same"
role for serial entrepreneurs?
"•	Is there really a first‐mover advantage or does it differ on a sectoral basis?"
"•	Does timing affect tech giants?"
Apple is a limelight baby and receives all the media attention. Google closely
1
The following Figure shows a sample ecosystem.
1 See http://www.starbucks.co.uk/coffeehouse/mobile‐apps and https://news.starbucks.com/
facts/starbucks‐mobile‐order‐pay‐national‐rollout.Figure:  A sample payment ecosystemPAYPAL
STRIPESQUAREMobile
Payment
FUNDAMOGONOWPAYOUZENIUSWELLS FARGOFIRST DATATDMONERISAcquirers
VISAMASTERCARD
AMERICAN
EXPRESSCard
Associations
PAYPAL BITCOIN BOKU AMAZON PAYMENTSClose Loop Payment eWallet
The examples cited above cater towards the American market but provide a good
overview of the players across categories and can be easily used for comparisons across countries.
Apple quickly followed suit. The evolution of such technologies will give rise to newer authentication norms at the device level and position Google/Apple as an evolutionary payment bank. Apple has always drifted away from the complexity of financial transaction processing but the benefits of building one in‐house are not a far‐fetched idea. We could ask Starbucks who recently did that and enjoy over a million transactions as part of their own payment network.
Energizer Effects
Privacy
Apple does a phenomenal job on privacy concerns by not storing the following:
"•	What you bought"
"•	Where you bought it"
"•	How much you paid for it."
Apple also refrains from exchanging any credit card information with merchants
Merchant Adoption
The above network numbers and the potential to add several more over the
Consumer Adoption
Let us change gears a bit and look at the following Figure. What do you see?126
FinTech Solu TionS126through technologies like iBeacon to provide live feeds or additional spot discounts
on products within one’s vicinity while shopping in a physical store. This approach to analysing big data as it flows in would avoid transactional data storage and spur the development of several applications around this domain. Apple Pay and Apple Watch users would eventually benefit from all these network externalities.
Industry Economics
Summary
"•	Apple Pay re‐energizes the iOS ecosystem and provides a new stream of revenue for Apple."
"•	Apple Pay has hit privacy concerns smack on their head."
"•	Payment industry economics and resulting network externalities may or may not work in Apple’s favour."
"•	Regulatory bodies will pay a huge role in the adoption of Apple Pay like similar technologies in emerging economies."
Potential for Data Analytics
Source: Secondary Technology Research Providers075150225300375
Mobile UsersMillions
MillionsTotal Active
0714212835
Credit Card UsersTotal Active
FinTech Solu TionS127FinTech Solutions Benefiting
other Sectors
By Rael Cline
The idea of a contract for the future delivery of an asset of a specified volume is not
1
2
An important step took place in 2013 when Deutsche Börse announced its Cloud
id/3055225.
competitors‐combined‐2015‐4/.128
3
4 and although
one may think that digital advertising budgets are still relatively small compared to
5 There is little doubt that this will be replicated throughout the world.
Use cases from a website’s point of view would be to combine the futures and
newsletter?).
Even option contracts would be extremely useful: often when pitching to a potential
numbers‐market‐estimates‐and‐forecasts/.
market‐to‐reach‐us79‐billion‐in‐2020/.
FinTech Solu TionS129for participants in both these markets. In both the cloud IaaS and programmatic
The potential gross notional size of a derivative market in either the cloud IaaS or
130
FinTech Solu TionS130FinTech Innovation for
Wearables
By Dominika E. Bajer
Fortune magazine headline read “Bloomberg report estimates that Apple could see revenues of up to $3.6B with a successful smart watch”.
1 A year later Forbes was
2
3
And then in 2015 the NFC wearable boom exploded. Near Field Communication
4
Lifestyle bands. Smartwatches. Wearable goggles. Fitness trackers. Body wear
Wearables – A FinTech Solution?
The answer is a simple one: by enabling NFC payments on wearable devices.
Imagine being able to turn any wearable device into an alternative payment device.
1 http://fortune.com/2013/03/04/how‐big‐might‐the‐market‐be‐for‐an‐apple‐smart‐watch/.
2 http://www.forbes.com/sites/arieladams/2014/03/07/the‐size‐of‐the‐smartwatch‐market‐its‐
key‐players/.
3 https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/wearables‐industry‐venture‐capital‐2014/.4 Oxford dictionary: http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/wearable.
FinTech Solu TionS131Imagine that on top of all the features which a favourite wearable already has we
Everything You Always Wanted to
Know About Wearables
Innovative financial services solutions are always on the verge of a hype. A decade
I spent last year monitoring the wearables tech market and became somehow
5
I could not help but conclude that to really witness the biggest consumer trend
That is how the NFC Wearables Boom Everything You Always Wanted to Know
About Wearables* (*But Were Afraid to Ask) cross‐industry knowledge sharing concept emerged. NFC wearable boom is currently present as a group forum on LinkedIn
5 By Victor Lipman. Forbes: “71% Of 16‐To‐24‐Year‐Olds Want ‘Wearable Tech.’ Why Don’t I
Even Want To Wear A Watch?”. 22 September 2014.
6 http://linkd.in/1LMbLm6.
7 http://bit.ly/1UodXE1.132
Contactless Limit
The fairy tale of NFC wearable boom should be concluded only by optimistic
The technology used in wearables is becoming more and more revolutionary and
The FinTech world is feeling increasingly excited as wearable technology blooms.
So whether NFC wearable boom will soon become an NFC payments wearable
“The future of payment is wearable. Wearables are the new trend in the field of internet‐
based devices”
There are more and more market players looking into NFC wearables and it is
only a matter of time before we recognize real industry influencers who will shape payments on remote RFID products.
8 Wirecard: https://www.wirecard.com/newsroom/press‐releases/newsdetail/wirecard‐presents‐
first‐payment‐wearable‐on‐hce‐basis/.
FinTech Solu TionS133Capital and
Investment6This part of the book is focused on capital raising options for FinTech
You will gain insight into the latest technologies which facilitate
to Basics
By Richard Goold
The “finance ladder”: the complete corporate finance process from start‐up
The Finance Ladder
I will consider the lifecycle of a FinTech company by looking at the financing options and stage‐posts of a high‐growth trajectory:
are the differences and the fundamental aspects of each type of financing?
"•	When might private equity come into play?"
"•	What are the advantages and disadvantages of taking a FinTech company public?"
Venture Capital – The Basics
Often companies start their capital raising journey by either bootstrapping (eking
will often be led by an institutional VC and the terms would be more protective and extensive than an angel would push for.
Other key elements are:
"•	Warranties"
"•	Restrictive covenantsThese are covenants from the founders that they will not compete with the company or do other things to harm the company’s business; and"
1 Those of us that have been involved in the investment community for some time have been
part of an initiative in conjunction with the British Venture Capital Association to pull in the
parameters of negotiation for such processes and a set of model documents can be found at http://www.venturecentral.co.uk/model‐documents/4585713181.138
"CaPital and invest Ment138•	Covenants"
B Rounds and Beyond
Growth Capital
Growth capital is sometimes used interchangeably with expansion capital but in the UK it is more typically put into less risky companies that are already profitable and that have not been through extensive rounds of institutional venture capital.
Private Equity
Different forms of management buyouts using private equity are as follows:a.
MBO – management buyout – when the existing second‐tier management utilize
private equity to buy out the existing top‐level management;
b. MBI – management buy‐in – when new management of the business come on board at the same time as the incoming private equity investor to replace the old management entirely; and
c.
BIMBO – buy‐in management buyout – a hybrid of the above where some existing management may stay along with new management coming in.When to Go Public?
The public markets are of particular interest to companies that have any level of
Building an Investable Platform
The frenetic pace of a FinTech start‐up means the tax position of the company
Beware of the Taxman
CaPital and invest Ment139is called a section 431 election to make sure all the exit proceeds are subject to
capital gains tax and not income tax.
Management Share Options
Founder Shares
CaPital and invest Ment140Angel Investing – Access to
“Smart Money” to Fund the Best FinTech Companies
By Susanne Chishti
The “angel round” is normally the first external funding round to inject cash into a
So how can you personally benefit from the enormous growth of the FinTech sector?
1 So angel investors who backed the initial funding
2
–  a lesson we have all heard before.
So where does angel investment fit in? What differentiates successful angel investors from the rest is their passion for a certain industry because of their previous experience and skills. Often this passion and deep domain expertise drives and empowers them to pick the winners. Post investment smart angels like to play an active role in the success of the company by doing anything in their power to help the company grow. That is why all FinTech entrepreneurs need their angels!
FinTech angels often come from the financial services and/or technology sectors
So where do angel investors make the best returns? Very few statistics exist and
3
articles/pinterest‐raises‐367‐million‐at‐11‐billion‐valuation‐1426538379.
uploads/2015/01/ERC‐Angels‐Report.pdf.
CaPital and invest Ment141Financial technology came out on top with FinTech as the most lucrative sector for
The report also found that these early‐stage investors are getting younger in the
So how do you become an angel investor? What are the key areas you should be
aware of when starting to invest?
"•	Diversification is king."
The problem for investors is that nobody knows who the winners will be and
4
CaPital and invest Ment142The negotiating process is again an opportunity to go into more details on company
After the investment the key objective of smart angels is to add value to their
The difficult next step is agreeing on a valuation. Normally FinTech firms will have
an idea about their valuation and about how much money they are looking for. This will normally be part of the pitch deck made available to angel investors. However valuations are never set in stone and can be negotiated taking into account:
development stage?
"•	What are the growth and valuation expectations for the company in the future?"
"•	How much can you afford to invest taking into account that you want to build up a diversified angel portfolio of companies and what equity stake would you like in return?"
CaPital and invest Ment143Crowdfunding and Marketplace
(P2P) Lending – Online Capital Marketplaces as New Asset Classes to Access Funding
By Brian W. Tang
Online capital marketplaces are FinTech platforms that facilitate fundraising by
accessing “other people’s money”.
The growth potential is tremendous. Goldman Sachs’ 2015 report entitled
such online capital marketplaces are creating new investment asset classes. But does the sector have the critical ingredients to create one or more sustainable asset classes?Disclosure Paradigm as the Basis
of Modern Global Capital Markets
Key to the integrity of all capital marketplaces and exchanges that seek to tap “other
people’s money” is the requisite trust in the quality of the fundraiser’s transparency/disclosure and independent gatekeeper due diligence/credit rating analysis.
In the lead up to the creation of the US Securities Act of 1933 and Securities
The principle behind the Disclosure Paradigm is fairly straightforward: limited
The Disclosure Paradigm has proven to be a relatively cost‐effective investor
The Global Financial Crisis’
Conduct Risk as a New Core
Focus of Financial Regulation and Supervision
Trust and Regulating Rapidly
Evolving Online Capital Marketplaces
Policy‐makers and industry participants will and should continue to debate the
FinTechnologist professionalism and investor education of this new form of
investment and its risks are essential to gain consumer confidence and avoid costly over‐regulation and prosecutions. This has been recognized by various industry initiatives such as the European Crowdfunding Network’s recently updated Code of Conduct for platforms and new Charter of Crowdfunding Rights for users.
More can and should be done. Only then may online capital marketplaces live up
Professional Education for
Advancement of the Online Capital Marketplace Ecosystem
least trusted industry globally. It is this loss of public trust that has in fact helped FinTech to emerge and quickly gain traction over the past few years. A critical lesson internet finance participants should also learn from the progression of financial services’ regulatory focus is the importance of reputation and reinforcing professionalism as a self‐regulatory mechanism to help gain the trust of both consumers and regulators. Academic research from the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching identifies three critical elements in professional 146
CaPital and invest Ment146The Digital Investment Space –
Spanning from Social Trading to Digital Private Banking – A FinTech Sector Made for Disruption?
By Michael Mellinghoff
In the mid-1990s the mutual fund industry introduced distribution fees to reward
These high profit margins are one of the reasons why digital competitors entered
The more robo advisory models mushroom – white‐label versions are already
available for example from start‐ups in Germany – the more different algorithms
CaPital and invest Ment147will be competing in future and will align over time. The independent robo advisory
The Internet of Things will also have an impact on our savings and investment
The traditional competition among portfolio managers on the best (risk‐adjusted)
CaPital and invest Ment148Leading the Way with an
Investor‐led Approach to Crowdfunding
By Christopher Smith
along with the verb “to crowdfund” and the adjective “crowdfunded”. So does its inclusion in a dictionary mean that crowdfunding has become mainstream and that it is no longer part of the alternative finance market? The answer is: not yet.
which sees investors receive shares in the company in return for their investment. Much of the complexity is due to the regulatory aspects of this type of financing.
A review published in December 2014 by the European Crowdfunding Network
2
Differing regulatory frameworks are not the only challenge to be overcome before
1 http://www.eurocrowd.org/files/2014/12/ECN‐Review‐of‐Crowdfunding‐Regulation‐2014.pdf.
2 http://www.eurocrowd.org/2015/04/germany‐adopts‐crowdfunding‐rules/.
A survey carried out by NESTA in the UK for their report “Understanding Alternative
Finance”
3 revealed that “sixty per cent of surveyed consumers said they are
4 states that in many instances investors
Some crowdfunding platforms’ websites do provide this type of information in their
Anyone who has watched Dragons’ Den or Shark Tank will occasionally have seen
5 highlights the value of
the involvement of the angel and invest under the same or similar terms as them.
3 https://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/understanding‐alternative‐finance‐2014.pdf.
4 Crowdfunding Innovative Ventures in Europe: http://goo.gl/Ol8Clv.5 http://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/siding_with_the_angels.pdf.150
voting or pre‐emption rights. This matters because ordinary investors may well see their stake heavily diluted if the company embarks on another round of funding at a higher valuation.
The investor‐led model of crowdfunding has clear benefits for investors over the
Properly priced investments are not the only factor in helping to protect the interests
This is often not the case on crowdfunding platforms that operate the company‐led
CaPital and invest Ment151My Robo Advisor was an
iPod – Applying the Lessons from Other Sectors to FinTech Disruption
By Paolo Sironi
markets;
"•	A significant growth in assets under management that robo advisors could harvest in a relatively short time;"
“What is a robo advisor?”
"•	Provide full digital access;"
"•	Perform automated portfolio rebalancing;"
"•	Adopt indexation or passive management;"
"•	Personalize to customers’ goals and behaviour."
“Is robo technology truly
disruptive?”
us to establish a parallel between the iPod’s disruption of the music industry and the game‐changing nature of robo advisors in banking.
Traditional firms typically face two challenges in their lifetime: deciding how much
“How do sustaining and disruptive
innovation interact to shape the future of banking?”
and industry/product performance over time (i.e. the quality of banking services):
1 http://www.claytonchristensen.com/key‐concepts/.improvement rate: innovation a client can absorb and its variability
disruptive innovation: introduces simpliﬁed and less expensive
time3
32
23
11
Figure:  Innovation and industry/product performance over time
The first Compact Disc (CD) player was sold in Japan by Sony in 1982. The CD
Steve Jobs grabbed this chance and in 2001 launched the Macintosh version of
“What does this tell us about the
fate of wealth management?”
Digital trends are a mix of technology advances and changes in consumers’
We can conclude that robo advisors possess all the elements to be a disruptive
Goal‐based investing will provide a way out for all the players that master the
“Will banks be extinct or will they
transform?”
CaPital and invest Ment154Crowdsourced Alpha
By Vinesh Jha
In August 2007 many established market‐neutral institutional investors experienced
1 shows the returns to quant strategies at the time. These were
But why were the alphas so similar across established firms? Because their data
The Need for New Data
6%7%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
−1%
−2%
−3%
−4%
7/30/20077/31/20078/1/20078/2/20078/3/20078/4/20078/5/20078/6/20078/7/20078/8/20078/9/20078/10/20078/11/20078/12/20078/13/20078/14/20078/15/20078/16/20078/17/20078/18/20078/19/20078/20/20078/21/20078/22/20078/23/20078/24/20078/25/20078/26/20078/27/20078/28/20078/29/20078/30/20078/31/2007
CaPital and invest Ment155or consumers who put effort into sourcing and cleaning this data can be
significant.
What is Crowdsourced Alpha?
We can use the crowd to forecast many things. A few examples can be seen in the
Table below.
Example 1: Crowdsourced
Earnings Estimates
Estimize is an innovative platform in which the crowd – amateur and professional
A simple average of the crowd’s forecasts is more accurate than Wall Street
M&A Rumor mill Mergerize by Estimize
Strategies Fund managers
156
CaPital and invest Ment156constraints on sell‐side analysts constrain their ability to produce timely research
We can gauge whether the greater accuracy helps investors by looking at the stock
We examine the returns to a trade idea – in the following Figure we have flipped
We see strong returns out to ten trading days in all regions. Because of the short
0 1 2 3 4 50.25%
0.20%
0.15%
0.10%
0.05%
−0.05%0.00%Cumulative residual returns to >5% surprises
Estimize EPS (N=2521) Wall Street EPS (N=2755)
Figure:  Cumulative residual returns to >5% surprises0.4%
0.3%
0.2%
0.0%
−0.1%
−0.2%
−0.3%
−0.4%
−5 0 5 10 15 200.1%Cumulative signed mean return to ideas by region
North America Europe Asia
CaPital and invest Ment157Table:  Historical returns of equity market neutral portfolios built using the TIM Indicator
Region Decile Annual Return Decile Sharpe Ratio Decile Hit Rate % days Stocks per Decile Decile Daily Turnover
Global 29.61% 5.52 69% 336 12%
North America 20.84% 2.56 59% 164 11%
Europe (excluding UK) 42.17% 5.02 65% 56 13%
United Kingdom 44.73% 3.7 61% 25 15%
Japan 31.70% 3.19 59% 50 12%
Asia (excluding Japan) 35.60% 2.79 59% 36 12%
Australia and New Zealand 36.84% 2.02 57% 13 13%Author performance is persistent: authors who have had profitable ideas in the past
continue to provide superior trade ideas in the future. Authors are 47% more likely to stay in an extreme performance group (top or bottom quintile) than they are to fall to the opposite quintile.
600%
500%
400%
300%
200%
100%
0%
Mar-07Jul-07Nov-07Mar-08Jul-08Nov-08Mar-09Jul-09Nov-09Mar-10Jul-10Nov-10Mar-11Jul-11Nov-11Mar-12Jul-12Nov-12Mar-130.3%
0.2%
0.0%
−0.1%
−0.2%
−0.3%
−10 10 0 20 30 40 50 600.1%Cumulative residual returns
blogger recommendations
Buy Sell
Figure:  Cumulative residual returns blogger recommendations158
Clearly there is alpha in financial blog posts. A market‐neutral investment strategy
TRESS Cumulative L/S decile returns
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1/3/2011 7/3/2011 7/3/2012 1/3/2013 1/3/2014 7/3/2013 1/3/2012
Figure:  TRSS cumulative L/S decile
CaPital and invest Ment159To Crowdsource a Hedge Fund
By Andrew Campbell
Why is quantitative investing not bigger? Should the financial upside not draw more
But what if this was not the case? What if everyone had the tools they needed
The structure and implementation of this quant crowdsourcing platform are not to
Money managers use the “Sharpe ratio” (a portfolio’s annual return in excess of the
The recent explosion in data availability has raised the potential for signal
This is where crowdsourcing comes in. By investing in a collection of fine‐tuned
CaPital and invest Ment161Providing Capital and Beyond
By Kayar Raghavan
Angel Investor and Non-Executive Director
People use the words money and capital interchangeably but that is a mistake.
Why am I saying this? Whether it is scarce public capital provided to start‐up
The Great Digital Divide
Lack of digital awareness and literacy also have other deleterious effects on society.
The other major reason for the digital divide is simply lack of access. In many
Large‐scale Revamping
of Education and Training
Growth Financing and Exit
Opportunities
The start‐up ecosystem can only be as strong as the encouragement and
CaPital and invest Ment163Raising money from other people to fund one’s start‐up business is never easy. It is
1
1 Source: HBR.164
CaPital and invest Ment164Many countries can also follow the example of the UK and a few other European
Yet another avenue to provide exit opportunities for angels and early‐stage investors
What I have outlined above are just some important areas to which private–public
These other areas encompass capacity building in the form of constant creation
CaPital and invest Ment165Enterprise
Innovation7Innovation has not been the focus of financial institutions
By Alessandro Hatami
2015 is the year when it became clear that the digital revolution has finally hit the
banking industry. A couple of headlines illustrate that: global investment in Financial Technology (FinTech) has tripled in 2013–14
1 and the British Bankers Association
announced that mobile banking has become the preferred way for customers to engage with their banks.
2 Most banks (although still not all) have finally come to
funds to be able to invest directly in early‐stage companies in the sector.4
novationlablondon.net/media/730274/Accenture‐The‐Future‐of‐Fintech‐and‐Banking‐
digitallydisrupted‐or‐reima‐.pdf.
www.bba.org.uk/news/press‐releases/mobile‐phone‐apps‐become‐the‐uks‐number‐one‐way‐to‐bank/#.ViEDdH6rSM8.
long lists of possible innovative propositions. Some of these have even progressed to pilot stage – but very few have actually been delivered at scale to the banks’ customer bases. This is because banks are fundamentally not designed to be innovative.
5
Does this mean the banks will not be able to innovate and meet the digital challenge? Not necessarily.
Banks build things all the time. They have well‐established procedures and
"•	A business case with a strong investment justification."
approach for all propositions they believe their bank should launch. These propositions should have business cases comparable to the banks’ other investments.
BankAmerideals at Bank of America.170
Let us take a closer look at what needs to be in place to deliver innovation:
Sponsors with Sway
One of the key principles of delivering change in a big organization is that things
Engaged Stakeholders
Stakeholder engagement is not only a necessary precaution. Stakeholders can
Confidence of Customer Buy‐in
Business Case
A business case needs an owner – in this case the sponsor fulfils that role. He or
This approach is very helpful with innovation that has a clear path to profitability. As
Innovation and digital change are changing the banking industry. It is the role of
that the culture of the bank will change.172
Lab is the Answer?
By Andra Sonea
FinTech Thought Leader
Life has undoubtedly accelerated as compared to 20 years ago. I can now buy
1.
Creativity and innovation need fertile ground to manifest themselves and the
environment needs to be purposefully created.
2. Consistent methods for absorbing the outputs of creativity and innovation in the larger organization need to be enabled.Foundations
"Key questions for management are:•	Do you have a vision about the level you want to play at? Globally? Nationally?"
"•	Are you focused on certain customer segments or products?"
"•	How do you want your bank to operate in five years?"
"•	Do you want your innovation function to explore and experiment in order to"
discover the path to that “future state”?
An innovation lab set up on such a path of discovery would be very different from
The most common form of experimentation in financial services within innovation
labs is with a “business‐led pipeline” or an “independent pipeline”. The first type
"•	What is the bank’s appetite for disruptive innovation?"
"•	Do we want the lab to focus on discovering disruptive business models and"
formulate the accompanying requirements for technology delivery?
"•	Or would we like the lab to focus on incremental innovation"
1 supporting other
1 I would leave aside the discussion of whether there is such a thing as “incremental innovation”.
YOURINNOVATIONLAB
IS THERE A NEED
FOR INNOVATIONTO HAPPEN IN F .S.?HOWDO YOU WANTINNOVATIONTO HAPPENSTRATEGICALL YGOAL FOCUSEDPACE
DISRUPTIVE
RADICAL
INCREMENTAL
TECHNOLOGY
BUSINESS
MODEL
PRODUCT
SERVICE
BIG DATA
BLOCK CHAIN
IDENTITY
THE NEXT BIG THING...FOCUS
“BETTING”
ON
FREE
EXPERIMENTATIONTHINKAGAINYES
NO
OTHER
INDUSTRIES
ACADEMIASTART -UPSWAYS
OF WORKINGPACE:DISRUPTIVE
INCREMENTALRADICAL
“GOOGLE
20%”
LAB PIPELINE
& FUNDING
“BUSINESS
DRIVEN”“INDEPENDENT”ACCELERATORSCOLLABORATION
Figure:  Defining your innovation lab – decision treeINNOVATION LABS
FOCUS AND
APPROACH
TECHNOLOGY
TECHNOLOGY
TECHNOLOGYPRODUCT/
SERVICE
PRODUCT/
SERVICEPRODUCT/
SERVICE
FOCUSFOCUS
INNOVATION
LABFOCUSIDENTITYRUPTIVERUPTIVEDISRUPTIVE INCREMENTALBIG DATA
BUSINESS MODELCX
BUSINESS MODEL
BUSINESS
MODEL
Figure:  Innovation labs – focus and approach
People
other’s energy and ideas.
Resources
I have seen both work. People can simply use the resources of the organization
2 some of them located
What makes the actual difference to the output of a lab is what type of resources
Methodology
Another key dimension of diversity is melding the ways of working in the start-ups
EntErPrisE innovation175Governance
Most of the bank’s governing rules have evolved over the years from the era of a
Innovation “Consumption”
What outputs does one expect to see from the bank’s innovation function?If a bank sets up a lab with a mandate for disruptive innovation focused on the use
Most of the outputs from a typical bank innovation lab could be included in one of
the categories below:
"•	New product"
Figure:  Author’s Twitter feed
176
"EntErPrisE innovation176•	Identification of new technology or combination of technologies for a specific use"
case
"•	Improved Customer Experience (CX) journey for a particular product or channel"
"•	Industry trends"
"•	Strategy reports"
"•	FinTech scouting and news"
"•	New business models."
Can the handshakes between the lab and the larger organization be predefined?I strongly believe they should. In some cases the lab could search a while for
experimentation in the organization.
New feature(s) of an existing product and/or
Require regular C-level discussions
followed by possible redefinition ofpriorities and scope of change. Mightinform investment decisions.
The most radical output for
innovation could lead to thedevelopment of an entire new stackfor the delivery of a new brand.Strategy reportsT rendsStart-up scoutingNew technology (disruptive potential)New business model (disruptive potential)
New Business ModelFROM OUTPUT TO ACTION
Figure:  From output to action
EntErPrisE innovation177and services. What sort of lab allows experimentation in the core of the bank?
178
EntErPrisE innovation178FinTechs and Banks –
Collaboration is Key
By Bjoern Erik Juengerkes
Partnerships between start‐ups and traditional companies are not new.
Experience with several European FinTechs has shown that FinTechs and banks
com/hc/en‐us/articles/201434362‐Making‐payments‐to‐Holvi.
club‐press‐2014‐05‐05.action.Collaborating Makes Sense
for Both FinTechs and Banks
Collaborations between FinTech companies and banks can take different forms.
5
Banks are usually risk‐averse and act much more slowly due to their regulatory
client needs and close the gap between the services offered by traditional banks and actual customer demands.
Needs for a Collaboration
FinTechs that are already operative need to make the choice whether a partnership
such as the integration of document analysis and semantic technology services of the German FinTech GINI into the online banking front end of Deutsche Bank.
7
8 This set‐up
9
Retail Banks
alternative‐sources‐of‐finance.
7 Available at https://www.gini.net/en/b2c/.
8 Concept called “Co‐” or “white” labelling.
EntErPrisE innovation180An existing customer base is attractive if FinTechs can use it in the way they would
Transaction or Specialized Banks (Including
Challenger Banks)
Partnerships with transaction or specialized banks are of importance in setting up
10
Into the Collaboration – Avoid
Frictions
Why Collaborate at All?
10 See http://paymentandbanking.com/2015/05/17/cooperations‐between‐banks‐and‐fintechs‐
in‐ger‐17‐05‐2015.
EntErPrisE innovation181Outlook
Partnerships between start‐ups and traditional organizations such as those
11
available at https://www.simple.com/blog/the‐next‐chapter.182
EntErPrisE innovation182Partnerships Are the Key
to Addressing Financial  and Digital Exclusion
By Marc Lien
and Nick Williams
There is a growing risk that digital exclusion is leading to financial exclusion. We
and medium enterprises (SMEs) and charities to understand how they use and feel about digital
technology.The Financial and Digital Inclusion
Imperative
Banks and FinTech communities can and must work together to reduce exclusion.
About Us
own digital products and services and help ensure we are being digitally inclusive for all our customers.
EntErPrisE innovation183Our Digital Transformation
One key part of our digital progress in this era of rapid and pervasive change has
We are the first major bank to have a Digital Division reporting directly into the
Our Digital Future
We can and will make digital more accessible for all our customers and one way
Our Digital Champions initiative was launched as part of our commitment to the
While we are determined to seize opportunities such as these to make digital
EntErPrisE innovation184Collaborative Partnerships
are the Key to Digital and  Financial Inclusion
FinTech points the way to our digital future and we need to nurture and harness
2 at a time when financial services
The Opportunity to Work Together
Lloyds Banking Group can and will play an important role in helping provide
Let’s work together.
2 Source: startupbootcamp FinTech Trend Report 2014. London has surpassed New York and
EntErPrisE innovation185Corporate Venture Capital   –
The New Power Broker in the
FinTech Innovation Ecosystem
By Nicole Anderson
corporate venturing can spur tomorrow’s innovations while it helps build an organization in which innovation is business as usual.”
1
There is an increased amount of funds focusing on FinTech globally. In exchange
differences in drivers and measures of success. The typical drivers behind corporate investment mandate are:
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/innovation_growth_mergers_acquisitions_
"corporate_venture_capital/?chapter=5.•	Strategy – to advance the future vision of the enterprise;"
"•	Expansion – to extend the company’s portfolio of products and services;"
"•	Innovation – to improve the competitive position and enhance customer"
experience or take strategic bets;
"•	Finance – to improve the financial return of the company"
2
3
CVC and the Opportunity for the
FinTech Ecosystem
Dozens of banks and financial services companies are already committing to “seed
investing” and many more are sponsoring large FinTech accelerators around the world. The “David and Goliath” connection is proving itself out in the search for strategic gains and predictable returns. It is very early days.
2 Nicole Anderson: https://medium.com/the‐fintech‐book/corporate‐venture‐the‐new‐power‐
broker‐in‐the‐fintech‐innovation‐ecosystem‐21bdfbad4ccb; Global Corporate Venturing Annual
Report – June 2015 .
3 The Economist (2015).186
average of $2 million to launch.
Accelerating Open Innovation in
FinTech
The need to innovate is impacting dozens of product and service areas across
5
Investment sustainability takes planning and an appetite for risk. It also requires
patience and embedded margin for “error”.
For those FinTech‐focused CVCs who understand the power of portfolio
management
Setting up for Success
The internal collaboration and fusion of planning between innovation and
x0x820077/8af78e45‐1d81‐4363‐931c‐439d04312ebc/JPMC‐AR2014‐LetterToShareholders.pdf.
technological‐turmoil‐in‐the‐financial‐services#ixzz3hG7UJcfV.
EntErPrisE innovation187Table:  Key questions for success
Structure Relationship with Parent Talent/Skills  Portfolio Management Ventures
"•	How has the Corporate"
Ventures Function (CVF) been set up?
"•	Strategic Goals – financial/strategic – what is the proper balance?"
"•	Measures of success (KPIs)?"
"•	Governance structure?"
"•	Composition of investment committee and advisory board? •	How do you set expectations for results?"
"•	How do you ensure fast decision‐making?"
"•	How do you get involvement of business groups (BGs) in the process?"
"•	How to keep the parent company and BGs involved in CVF’s activities?"
"•	How do you bring portfolio companies into the parent and BGs?•	Partner/Managing Director profiles?"
"•	Compensation and implications on acceptance CVF by organization?"
"•	VC reward policy or Corporate reward policy? •	How do you get access to the best deal opportunities?"
"•	Deal flow funnel?"
"•	Board/observer seats in ventures?"
"•	What does CVC offer the companies and co‐investors? •	How do you build your reputation in the ecosystem?"
"•	How do you generate a high quality deal pipeline?"
"•	Majority/minority stake?"
"•	Do you co‐invest in syndicates?"
Table:  Guidelines for setting up an external CVF
"Structure•	A clear investment focus essential"
"•	Tenure – needs to be long‐term – investments need time to mature"
"•	Efficient investment process to keep up with market speed"
"•	Success metrics covering financial and strategic elements"
"•	Location close to corporate office or major business groups for internal  networkingVentures•	Minority stakes are most common"
"•	Co‐investment options should be the norm"
"•	Board/observer seat in venture and involvement in major decisions"
"•	Active support of portfolio companies"
"•	Stable and consistent network in venture ecosystem"
"•	Reputation and track record is key for ensuring quality deal flow"
"Relationship to Parent•	CVF should have broad and resilient network within parent and business groups (BGs)"
"•	Dialogue between CVF with BGs and Corporate Centre needs to be systematic"
"•	Early BG involvement during investment process"
"•	Portfolio companies need regular exposure to BGsTalent/Skills•	Team size for fund: 5–8"
"•	Employees representing a mix of VC and internal background (50/50)"
EntErPrisE innovation188FinTech CVC – Lessons to Live By
CVC should be a true business partner both to its internal stakeholders and to its
EntErPrisE innovation189The Insurance Opportunity
By Péter Orlovácz
Distribution
One of the most significant technology‐driven disruptions in distribution has been
the rise of aggregators
The distribution model may also be changed by companies providing services
where insurance is just one component. This may take many forms:
"•	An infamous example is payment protection insurance (PPI) bundled with loans"
and mortgages in the UK. This insurance policy was said to be protecting its holders in case they were not able to repay a loan or mortgage.
EntErPrisE innovation190Big Data
Insurance is the world’s first big data business as companies have been using data
to model and price risk way before the term became fashionable. Insurers’ past loss and underwriting data is one of their most valuable assets.
While it is too early to say that the insurance industry has nailed big data and is using
1 This is
not the kind of risk insurers can or would like to price into their models.
New Entrants
A Note on the Digital Insurer
EntErPrisE innovation191More
Success Stories8Throughout the book we have heard from successful FinTech companies about their
based on the vision of an intrapreneur and how SWIFT was able to spot and successfully respond to the FinTech opportunities for entrepreneurs and its global membership base of financial institutions. Both stories clearly demonstrate that even established financial institutions have the capacity to innovate and embrace change.eToro – Building the World’s
Largest Social Investment Network
By Yoni Assia
It is a cold Monday winter morning in the Netherlands and Noa Strijbos has gone
1 On the
Building the Network
Scaling the Network
1 http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/05/29/idUSL5N0YC2RT20150529.196
More Succe SS Storie S 196financial news and investments within personal news feeds. Traders were now
The ability to copy the traders on the eToro OpenBook not only allows members
2 As well as
The success in establishing and scaling our community was born out of a deep
Breaking the Banks
edu/~panwei/pub/socialcom12.pdf.
13 Years in the Making
By Derek Corcoran
It felt like the culmination of an intense 5-month period of positive press – we had
not Business Process Management
Avoka shifted the focus from managing an organization’s internal processes to
We learned a lot during this period about consumer behaviour and what makes a
Building the capability to support mobile and desktop devices from a single design
More Succe SS Storie S 198PIVOT 3 – Cloud Computing
Comes of Age
Jeff Bezos and the Cloud were changing how organizations built and hosted their software applications. And this provided an enormous opportunity for Avoka.
PIVOT 4 – Focus. Focus. Focus.
Then we got lucky. We were introduced to a financial institution that was absolutely
More Succe SS Storie S 199least reduced. By looking at the friction or effort associated with completing an
cutting-edge banking and financial technology (with a unique demo-only format) and won three back-to-back “Best of Show” awards. This provided confirmation that what we were talking about and delivering was valued by the finance sector. Avoka was now a SaaS company focused on frictionless customer experiences in financial services.
We had found our home.
Lessons Learned
Disruptors – those that offer an alternative to traditional banking such as peer-to-
peer lending.
Sell something that makes your clients successful – if your product/service can be
More Succe SS Storie S 200Bankable – Banking as
a Service
By Eric Mouilleron
I founded Bankable in 2007 when the word “FinTech” had not even been coined.
It all started at a dinner party in London in November 2006 where I met a lady who
identified an opportunity to launch a financial tool targeted towards the younger generation. I introduced him to Bankable’s platform while having coffee with him one morning when he realized that the platform’s bespoke functionality could power his idea. Bankable then provided a set of APIs
2 allowing him to quickly build Anyti.
1 sponsorship. With these
1 A Bank Identification Number (BIN) is the first 6 digits on a payment card and identifies the
bank that issues/sponsors it.2 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.202
More Succe SS Storie S 202The Next Chapter in Citi’s
Story of Innovation
By Jorge Ruiz
The Onset of FinTech
Banks have the opportunity to rethink how they approach innovation and to
The pace of FinTech innovation today is a challenge for traditional banks. Large
One specific area in which Citi is fast-tracking FinTech innovation and development
The Path to Acceleration
way for them to get their foot in the door. It is not always easy to get a meeting or
More Succe SS Storie S 203sign a deal with an executive at a global financial institution. How could we make
Creating the Citi Mobile Challenge
Citi’s approach to banking innovation is more than a competition. It is an opportunity for us to transform the financial industry by working with top developers and designers who can take us to the next level and truly change the way the world banks. CMC is connecting developers and resources in a way that is not happening frequently or quickly enough elsewhere in financial services.
The CMC takes place wherever the developers are – the choice of when and how to
work is entirely in their hands. Developers from around the globe are given access to APIs
1 from Citi and from leading technology companies to build solutions that
Citi Mobile Challenge Launches
in Latin America
Citi Mobile Challenge launched its inaugural programme in Latin America in
Citi Mobile Challenge Travels the World
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.204
More Succe SS Storie S 204even some alumni from past Challenges. Developers in EMEA completely reimagined
What’s Next?
More Succe SS Storie S 205FinTech Trends from
By Fabian Vandenreydt
The FinTech landscape has changed substantially since Innotribe was launched
Geographical trends are also interesting. FinTech innovation tends to emerge
More Succe SS Storie S 207Crypto-
currencies  and  Blockchains9This part focuses on digital currency and the various
important manifestation of blockchain technologies has been Bitcoin. What comes next? What are alternative applications of the underlying blockchain technology to financial services?
Most Bitcoin 2.0 applications are still at the emerging
operators of the data store’s nodes. The initial and most widely known application of blockchain technology is the public ledger of transactions for bitcoin.FinTech + Digital Currency   –
Convergence or Collision?
By Manie Eagar
Crypto-currency Meets Digital
Finance and Mobile Value Exchange
In just two short years crypto-currency has grown from a hobby project to a multi-billion
The bitcoin proposition: In his seminal paper “A peer-to-peer electronic cash
From this simple premise the bitcoin phenomenon has grown in scope (2 million
plus current users projected to grow to 5m according to Juniper research
But what is unstoppable is the convergence of two major FinTech sectors with that
The Internet of Money: A Radical
New Business Model
The key drivers for the emerging FinTech and digital currency innovation are to
2
What will drive the adoption of the overlapping technologies and the efficiencies and disruptive business opportunities? The 2015 World Economic Forum report on “The Future of Financial Services”
3 highlights that incumbent players are most likely to be
attacked where the greatest sources of customer friction meet the largest profit pools.
2 http://www.fintechinnovationlablondon.co.uk/media/730274/Accenture-The-Future-of-Fintech-
and-Banking-digitallydisrupted-or-reima-.pdf.
3 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_future__of_financial_services.pdf.1 http://www.juniperresearch.com/researchstore/commerce-money/cryptocurrency/
bitcoin-altcoin-impact-opportunities.212
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains212Digital Asset Management and
Value Exchange
Digital asset management and value exchange are fast becoming the virtual market
Production of value:
Co-creation of value:Storage of value:
promotion & distribution of
value:Producers /
Creator(s)
The production and
lnterexchange of  digital goods
and services; e.g. content
design); smart contracts; share
certificates; legal; accounting;
machine-to-machine trading;
knowledge and skills sharing;
digital market spaces for digital
storage of value; e.g.
distributors; exchanges; market
tokenization; digital currencies;
loyalty schemes; promotions
etc.
patents and licenses lodged
on cross-linked publlc/private
transactions and usage
recorded and stored in
distributed ledgers
(blockchains).Exchange of value:
of value exchange:
and promoters of digital goods
and services.
Validation and verification of
identity and transactions.
The ‘Internet of things’ meets
the ‘Internet of value
exchange’ .
The tokenization of value
distribution.Digital market
spacesUsers /
Consumer(s)
Figure:   Digital asset management and value exchange
Key sectors that the distributed ledger (blockchain) and related tokenization (read digital currencies) plus smart contracts applications will address are:
"•	Government-to-government (G2G) verification and validation of assets and data"
trust
Sharing
& resourcesCollaboration
Co-creation
& productionDistribution
& Exchange
of Value
+
IOTStorage
Figure:   Value creation and exchange in the digital economy + the
Internet of Things
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains213and global economies. Business will in turn leverage consumer databases and
performance tracking to streamline their services and deliver value at scale.
Hybrid Digital Finance Platform
Convergence
Digital finance will be distinguished from the old ways of banking and traditional
4
Delivery platforms from every sector of the industry will vie for a stake in this
5
He envisions a hybrid Bitcoin-Fiat future where “The existence of a ‘euro-denominated economy’ and a ‘virtual currency economy’ raises the prospect of an internal balance of payments between two sub-economies where suppliers may prefer one currency over another as a means of payment (for different goods and services).”
convergenceMobile payments
- Branchless banking
- Micropayments
Internet of value
exchange
- Mobile commerce
- TokenizationCryptocurrency
protocols
- Digital tokens
- Blockchains
Figure:   Convergence of FinTech
4 http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/04/15/massive-drop-in-number-of-
unbanked-says-new-report.5 https://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/speeches/Pages/GarethMurphyBitFin2014.aspx.214
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains214One area of convergence highlighted by long-running venture capital firm Kleiner
6 is the rapid developer adoption of the technology with fundamentally
"•	Mobile is a lead driver for change in payments technology – specifically the"
remittances and money transfer markets. Nearly half of all online sales are now made over mobile devices (IMRG Capgemini)
7.
"•	Dramatic uptake of smartphone devices and mobile phone penetration in emerging markets (not just the “unbanked”). 67% of the people on the planet now have a mobile phone conducting an estimated 300bn transactions valued at $860bn. There are already 1bn mobile banking users (Mobile Commerce revolution)."
8
M-Pesa – Lessons for Integrated FinTech +
Digital Currency Merchant and Consumer Adoption?
It was originally designed by Safricom (Vodafone) as a system to allow microfinance-
Blockchain
Value ChainValue Exchange
Network Infrastructure & APIs
Document Storage & Delivery
Digital Content
App Development
Marketplaces
Smart Contracts
Financial
Currency Exchange
& Remittances
Syndicated Loans
Private Shares
Treasury Repos
Loyalty Points
Interbank Payments
P2P Transfers
InsuranceAsset Registries
Gold & Diamonds
Property Titles/Land RecordsData StorageSupply Chain ManagementLogisticsIOTSecurity
Digital Identity ManagementAuthentication & AuthorizationCompliance/KYC/AMLGovernance & RiskManagementAuditing
Figure:   The value chain
6 https://www.kpcbedge.com.7 http://internetretailing.net/2015/12/45-of-ecommerce-sales-now-made-via-mobile-devices/.
8 http://ptgmedia.pearsoncmg.com/images/9780789751546/samplepages/9780789751546.pdf. Digital Currencies and Mobile
Transactions
Branchless banking is the key distribution channel strategy used for delivering
financial services without relying on bank branches and is also being used as a separate channel strategy that entirely forgoes bank branches. Overriding even
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains215Interoperability – The Integration
Challenge (and Opportunity)
The challenge is that emerging financial technologies do not trust or have access to
interoperabilityDistributed
(on the edge)
- Network deployment
(nodes)
- Points of access
(mobile devices)
Decentralized
- Open source
- Anonymous
- Operate autonomously
- Off-network P2P
transfersCentralized
- Issuing Authority
- Services aggregation
- Closed User Groups
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains216Blockchain and
Crypto-currencies
By Adam Hayes
and Paolo Tasca
The notion of an entirely digital form of money has captured the curiosity of
How Does Digital Currency Work?1
A second player enters the casino and sits down at a second roulette table. The
It is important to remember that each spin of a roulette wheel is an independent
Bitcoin mining serves a dual purpose; it is not merely the method of introducing
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChainsBitcoin works in much the same way: miners compete with each other to solve a
and at the same time validates and confirms internal bitcoin-bitcoin transactions. But what if this same powerful time-stamped validation engine could be harnessed to confirm and verify external non-bitcoin specific transactions?
Bitcoin 2.0 and Future Trends
2
praised the technology but called out the bitcoin community for being overly ideological. See
Research Working Paper.
4 See https://cryptocointalk.com /forum/178-scrypt-cryptocoins/.
3
Digital Currencies
5
Asset Registries
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChainswith additional external data (a phenomenon referred to as “blockchain bloat”)
11
Application Stacks
These are “non-currency” blockchain-based platforms that will be used for the development and execution of complete applications on top of decentralized networks.
By complete applications we mean Distributed Autonomous Organizations (DAOs).
12 Current application stacks that allow for implementation of
13
Asset-Centric Technologies
Asset-centric technologies are based on a new concept of distributed consensus which gets rid of the expensive and resource-wasting proof-of-work system which is the default consensus mechanism utilized by Bitcoin.
and Namecoin are the most famous examples of asset-centric technologies.15
16 The element that
distinguishes these asset-centric technologies with respect to the other blockchain-based technologies described above is the fact that these represent distributed exchangers where network users can exchange among themselves various heterogeneous real assets.
Conclusions
be increased to 8 MB.
7 See http://www.omnilayer.org/.
8 See https://www.coloredcoins.org and https://www.coinprism.com.
9 See https://namecoin.info/.
10 See https://www.counterparty.com.
interoperable with a two-way peg. This could allow for the transfer of assets between the side-
org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs-das-and-more-an-incomplete-terminology-guide/.
Ireland. See http://karlodwyer.github.io/publications/pdf/bitcoin_KJOD_2014.pdf.
coin.info/.
currency but at the same time it guarantees a distributed ledger base which gives each partici-pant freedom in choosing which combinations of other participants to trust.219
220220
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChainsThe Future of
FinTech10This concluding part of the book aims to chart the future course of FinTech over the next
Everybody agrees that collaboration is key. Are Application Programming Interfaces
(APIs) the secret tool to implement partnerships in practice? Could APIs even help banks to escape their legacy systems and compete at start-up speed? Will we see global FinTech banks emerge which – thanks to their own banking licence – will no longer rely on established players or be at the mercy of long procurement processes? Will “FinTech Marketplace Banking” reverse the existing value chain completely where established players become actual suppliers to FinTech banks?
Will Change Financial Services
By Manoj K. Kashyap
and Grégory Weber
The financial services sector is in the nascent stage of digital disruption. Its main
Many Opportunities for FinTech
Are Yet to be Explored
in the world.1 While cash still remains the primary method of payment for low value
2 which is around five times more
4 (from US$235.4bn in
5
7
Investable assets will reach US$200tn by 2020.8 The highest increase will come
9 The
10 from 2013 to 2020).11
1 PwC Market Research Centre based on Goldman Sachs data.
3 PwC analysis based on ECB data.4 PwC Market Research Centre based on Goldman Sachs data.
7 https://www.lendingclub.com/info/statistics.action.
8 PwC Market Research Centre based on Credit Suisse data.
9 Ibid.
10 Compound Annual Growth Rate.
12 and this figure is set to grow
13 Market players will also increasingly
Global Insurance Premiums
Will Amount to US$800 per  capita in 2020
14
The global value of insurance premiums will reach US$6.2tn by 2020 growing at
15
The Future of FinTech Largely
Depends on Five Game-changers
In this highly dynamic environment we have identified five main game-changers
Customer Experience (CX)
17 insurance and more.”18
a dynamic and diverse financial services environment. This raises a critical question for incumbents: to what extent will they be able to adapt their business models and IT infrastructures to cope with this new competitive landscape.
16 PwC Market Research Centre based on GSMA data.17 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
18 Santander Innoventures website.
software applications. The API specifies how software components should interact.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech227Fin & Tech Connection
The connection of Finance and Technology is producing a collaborative spirit in
Data Monetization
21
Crypto-technologies (“Blockchain”)
The truly disruptive innovation will certainly come from crypto-technologies or blockchain.
22 A public and unbreakable ledger that serves as a record of transactions that was first brought
23
Adapt (to) Regulation
FinTech firms have already managed to successfully penetrate the financial
The Fu Ture o F FinTech228The Future of Financial
Services
By Axel Apfelbacher
FinTech Thought Leader
The Future of Financing
Crowdlending will become a significant additional channel for accumulating
The Future of Identity
“Wonderful. Any additional input required?”
Blockchain technology will change the nature of financial transactions as it leads to
This distributed ledger system is designed to reduce the likelihood of hacking as
The Future of Money
“The total processing fees of 1.4% of transaction value will be transferred with the
The issuance of electronic currency by the national banks around the world
Consumption
holiday in Africa.”
“Your savings rate is 10% of net income. The rate to achieve your net wealth target by
the age of 57 is an annualized 8.2%. May I recommend a wonderful resort in Portugal instead who are looking for new customers and are offering 4 weeks for your family at a bargain price?”
The question of whether to use available cash resources for saving or consumption
charging model of the providers that will live off usage fees or referral fees/advertising revenues from providers of the products and services that are being channelled through the DFAs’ analysis engine. Some DFAs will offer their users the choice of whether they are willing to pay for their services with money or the (restricted or unrestricted) use of anonymized transactional and other data for advertising purposes. New property rights for personal data will finally enable the owner of such data to determine the degree to which such data can and shall be disclosed to outside parties and will finally put a price on the use of such data by external parties.
The trade-off between the immediate use of cash resources and saving such
The Fu Ture o F FinTech230The Future of Financial Literacy
take an extended holiday and arrange accommodation and transport after approval?”
“… Holiday request processed … and approved. Enjoy your trip. Your flight details are
available on your Watchlet. Please remember to take your annual financial education test next month as your license will expire on 17 May.”
The nature of financial services and the global financial architecture will evolve
The Fu Ture o F FinTech231Banking on Innovation
Through Data
By Dr Marc Torrens
Technology innovation has been vital to the online banking industry since Stanford
Federal Credit Union offered the world’s first internet banking portal in 1994.1 The
From Financial Product Vendors
to Solution Providers
The transactional data banks are collecting from millions of customers and the new
data revolution are the necessary ingredients to disrupt the products and services banks are currently offering. This disruption will shift banks from their current position of vendors of financial products to providers of financial solutions.
Banks are actually very well positioned to do precisely this; they can develop
technologies that offer financial solutions instead of a catalogue of products by learning from the data they have been collecting for decades. The challenge is to extract meaning from that data and use it to offer the right products at the right time to the right customer. This new knowledge should encode preferences and tastes from customers in a very precise way. These actionable insights can then be used to propose personalized financial solutions to specific customer challenges.
The Data Revolution is Here
2
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/bc70c9fe-4e1d-11e3-8fa5-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3ojXmfGVg.232
"•	A corporate organization and culture that is not designed for rapid innovation."
Their Data Advantage?
The question that arises is then: how exactly can banks innovate to compete with
these new players (e.g. internet giants and FinTech start-ups) by exploiting their unique data advantage?
Living in a world of interconnected systems in which real value comes more and
3 on top of which third-party innovators can develop the next generation of
Banks should follow suit and start offering well-structured and secure APIs to
The FinTech application development community is endlessly creative and
3 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech233ecosystem will be able to offer more personalized solutions based on products
already offered by banks. These solutions will enable consumers to achieve their specific goals with financial plans tailored to their precise needs and behaviours.
This proposed new ecosystem in which banks focus on their core business and
Innovation Ecosystem
Data science applied to financial transactional data that banks hold opens up new
The Fu Ture o F FinTech234Why FinTech Banks Will Rule
the World
By Philippe Gelis
The financial industry is one of the last large industries that has not been completely
It is a first step for banks to open incubators or to create venture capital (VC)
"•	Loans and credit"
"•	Payments"
"•	Foreign exchange and remittance"
"•	Wealth managementLending Club is by far the global flagship FinTech company. The success of"
It is important to note that many FinTech businesses have evolved from pure
banking” (or “FinTech banks”). This will be a type of bank based on five simple elements:
1.
A core banking platform built from scratch.
2. An API1 layer to connect to third parties.
3. A compliance/KYC infrastructure and processes.
client funds without restrictions.
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
comprised of:
1. Bank accounts (multi-currency)
2. Credit and debit cards (multi-currency)
3. eWallet (multi-currency).
Imagine that you are a client of this “marketplace bank” and that you need a loan.
I have been asked several times about this business model and I think it’s a
We will see banks pay a commission to FinTech banks to serve their customers!
1.
Technology/API/Compliance/KYC: building the technology is a complex element
but many people have the skills to do so. So it is definitely not the main barrier.
3.
Customer base/CRM: This is the most complex part. How do you attract a critical mass of customers based on a simple offering (accounts + cards + eWallet) that relies on third parties for additional services? You cannot only rely on marketing and having a cool brand to attract hundreds of thousands of new customers if you have nothing really different to offer.
generation digital banks”. My view is that most of them have no clear differentiator. Being online only or opening 24 hours a day 7 days a week is not appealing 236
The Fu Ture o F FinTech236build it. FinTech banks are inevitable! This is just a blueprint. To pull it off requires
second wave. This creates a fantastic “window” for us FinTech entrepreneurs to
The Fu Ture o F FinTech237The FinTech Supermarket –
By Spiros Margaris
It is the one that is the most adaptable to change.”
The financial institutions of the future will have to be very different from today’s
The FinTech Supermarket
The FinTech Supermarket proposal refers to an almost single-minded pursuit of primarily using FinTech firms as financial service providers. It is figuratively a logical development of well-known open fund architecture but with the important distinction that the best FinTech companies are offered in place of the best fund products. It is about the possibility of combining an open selection of the best FinTech partners and the best packages of financial services under one roof. Leading independent and innovative FinTech companies will provide the majority of all financial services.
Client benefits
"•	Lower fees and therefore higher overall returns and savings."
FinTech benefits
"•	Maintenance of core competencies and independence: a partnership with or sale to a third party is not precluded."
FinTech supermarket benefits
"•	Reduction of costs and the ability to provide customers with independent best-in-class services.238"
"The Fu Ture o F FinTech238•	Continuous growth and acquisition of up-to-date know-how through financial"
services partnerships.
The advance of new financial industry competitors and business models such
as the FinTech Supermarket will bring about disruptive changes that could also be very painful for many participants. It will also naturally stabilize the income of the financial industry at a lower level through greater competition and associated pressure on profit margins.
Financial Regulation
Millennials
Many solutions to the needs of millennials will be transferable to other
Banks must beware that the technology giants are coming and that some FinTechs
Financial institutions would be well advised to try to evaluate the business model of
Near You!
Technology giants and FinTechs will play an important role not only in the retail
The tremendous interest and investments of global venture capitalists in FinTech
The Fu Ture o F FinTech240Banks Partnering
with FinTech Start-ups to Create an Integrated Customer Experience
By Bernard Lunn
People sometimes assume that “entrepreneur” means “young dude in a garage”
Banks should feel urgency.However that does not mean taking wild and ill-considered risks based on
Banks cannot think clearly about this until they accept that almost all of the valuable
data is outside their IT firewall – it is out on the open internet. This “programmable web” is a giant resource that FinTech start-ups use to win in terms of shorter time to market and lower cost value propositions.
bit of technical jargon called an API.
1 API stands for Application Programming
Interface; it simply means how to get resources (data and algorithms) from an external system and send resources back to that external system. Most of the resources that banks need do  not sit behind their IT firewall. Most of those
resources are on the open internet and belong to the FinTech start-ups that banks need to partner with.
The good news is that this is a win-win partnership – as long as established players
choose the right start-ups to partner with. Some start-ups do want to “eat your lunch”. They provide a service today to part of the banks’ market. They might not sell
to banks’ customers  just yet  (because they are starting with a segment of the market
after the bank’s core customers. The threat from some start-ups is very real.
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech241investment does not confer proprietary advantage in digital businesses. If a network
These win-win partnerships are all about data.
All the “hot spaces” that one reads about in the tech media are about data. Think
Think of network marketplaces in the wealth management market such as Lending
Club and Angel List. These marketplaces create a lot of data – which they are happy to make available to partners who will add value to that data and by doing so add to the network effects for the marketplace.
Add Value at the Customer
Experience Level
Data needs context and that means clever algorithms and user experience designs
Banks are service businesses – not marketplaces – and should not suffer from
2 and Charles Schwab
Big Brand plus Start-up Agility is a
Winning Combination
that consumers were having problems buying stuff online around 1996.
"•	This is clearly the future and these early adopters are giving us our “to do list”. This is the smart reaction and should drive the Customer Experience design."
The Great Rebundling
"•	Small and medium-sized businesses."
2 http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-12-20/intercontinentalexchange-said-in-merger-
talks-with-nyse-euronext.242
The Fu Ture o F FinTech242private equity. These emerging micro asset managers charge a fraction of the
incumbent asset managers because their costs are far lower – they trade and the marketplaces do the rest (back office admin and access to investors). These micro asset managers are low cost and agile because they think about one thing and one thing only – profitable trades.
Rebundling in Small and Medium
Enterprise (SME) Banking
The rebundling opportunity in small and medium business banking sits at
Banks deserted small business lending because it was not as scalable as
Rebundling in Wealth Management
Moore’s Law will remorselessly drive down price – eventually to free – of commodity services such as asset allocation. This is what robo advisers are doing today – asset allocation for 25 basis points.
Do not try to compete at this commodity layer with a high cost structure. The
consolidation at this layer will be brutal and somebody like Vanguard with existing scale has the advantage.
The key to the rebundling opportunity is a new breed of “micro asset managers”
Lending Club and Angel List are already mature and are disrupting these
markets. On Daily FINTECH
3 we also profile ventures at an earlier stage that are
on the global FinTech sector: http://dailyfintech.com/.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech243marketplaces to unbundle lending by offering low cost solutions. During the
The Rebundling Phase Has to be
Driven from the Top
"•	Lou Gerstner’s turnaround of IBM after it was nearly wiped out by the PC wave of"
disruption.
"•	Steve Jobs’ turnaround of Apple after it too was nearly wiped out by the PC wave of disruption."
"•	Google’s early intervention by buying Android and how that saved Google from being disrupted by mobile."
"•	Facebook’s late intervention by buying Instagram and WhatsApp to avoid being disrupted by mobile.Common threads in all these transformation programmes:"
"•	Customer Focus"
The tech giants did not ask customers “what do you want?” via traditional focus
groups. They figured out where the trend was heading (what new technology was coming) and created products that met real needs but which customers were not asking for because customers did not know what was technically possible.
"•	Culture"
Lou Gerstner summed it up in his classic book (Who Says Elephants Can’t
Dance
4). Gerstner writes that he knew before he started that a big challenge
"•	CEO"
Real transformational innovation cannot be delegated. This has to be driven from
the top. All the above examples illustrate this.
Can_t_Dance.html?id=WyDMM6bz8SMC&source=kp_cover&hl=en.244
The Fu Ture o F FinTech244The Rise of BankTech – The
Beauty of a Hybrid Model for Banks
By Frank Schwab
and Sophie Guibaud
in terms of money and speed. International transfer commissions of up to 8% and several days of waiting for one’s own money are not acceptable in a world of real-time communication.
While some institutions have been looking into rebuilding their core and middleware
A Viacom Media Survey from 2014
1 states that 53% of customers do not think their
While governments are working on making it easier for consumers to switch bank
The frictionless integration of financial services into the digital lifestyle of a
customer’s life is the technical challenge a bank has to face in order to cope with future challenges. It is necessary that banks act and think as FinTech companies and not only as enablers of FinTech by adopting an open cultural approach.
FinTech start-ups have been challenging and reinventing all aspects of the banking
1 http://www.millennialdisruptionindex.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/MDI_Final.pdf.
We have also positioned ourselves as a FinTech enabler through an open API
2
"•	The first layer is comprised of a traditional overdraft provided by Fidor on which"
Fidor generates revenues through interest paid by customers.
The main idea behind this is to create and offer a number of options including proprietary and third-party offers (open architecture banking) instead of constraining a client to make a formal application for one bank product offering with no alternative to it. Fidor has been positioning itself as an aggregator of these financial services – rebundling the “unbundled financial services”.
Let us illustrate this model with the example of the relationships between MVNOs
These FinTech companies have been successful in either addressing a particular
pain-point experienced by clients around a given financial service or addressing
2 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.246
The Fu Ture o F FinTech247FinTech Impact on Retail
Banking – From a Universal Banking Model to Banking Verticalization
By Roberto Ferrari
The digital disruption tide has arrived to hit the banking and financial services
The point is that traditional banks have not yet been capable of facing two major
disruptive external forces simultaneously:
1.
Change in regulation
2. Change in consumer habits (and technology).
even worse.
capital and liquidity requirements have been imposed. Banking assets have been heavily scrutinized through stress tests. Many large banks have been fined for uncompetitive and unfair behaviour. This has had two major impacts:
"•	Banks have been focusing on heavy regulatory issues rather than on facing new"
"market challenges.•	Cost of compliance and regulation has flown high – Accenture’s FinTech Innovation Lab has estimated that most large banks have been spending 70 cents on the dollar on compliance and regulation."
The same regulatory and digital factors together are playing a significant role
The retail banking industry is still struggling to change its operating models and
FinTech: The Rise of New
Generation Banking?
can open up a payment/e-money account with a prepaid/debit card with a Payment Institution
2 or with an Electronic Money Institute.3 In the US players like Simple or
The unbundling of the full service universal banking model is already happening.
Each of the verticals is a large cluster containing several sub-segments and in
Vertical Segment #1: Transactional
Services
This cluster includes a large range of payment services and according to McKinsey
can account for up to 15% of global retail banking revenues which are being attacked by FinTech firms. New players include banking/transactional service providers such as Moven to send-money and cross-border remittance services 1 Source: Accenture Study March 2015.
2 http://www.fca.org.uk/firms/firm-types/payment-services-institutions/.
3 http://www.fca.org.uk/firms/firm-types/emoney-institutions.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech249the $1 billion threshold led by Wealthfront and Betterment. This is a segment that
4 boosted also by initiatives of
The overall objective here is accessibility of investment guidance to a broader
The business at stake here is potentially huge. The evolution of social welfare
investment advisory legislation may differ geographically?
"•	Will digital-only platforms be replaced or challenged themselves by hybrid digital and human interfaces (such as Personal Capital in the US)?"
Transactional services have been one of the first segments to be unbundled.
Another component of the transactional business vertical is digital currencies such
A stack of new value-added services is provided in combination with payments:
Vertical Segment #2: Investing
4 http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-06-18/robo-advisers-to-run-2-trillion-by-2020-if-
this-model-is-right.250
Here as well the whole stack is being revolutionized by additional frictionless user experience-led interfaces and customer-driven analytics and engines.
Vertical Segment #3: Financing
Although the original business model of a peer-to-peer (P2P) lending platform has
Vertical Segment #4: Cross-
software Platforms
The last horizontal stack of the proposed Verticalization scheme is composed of
cross-software platforms that will be needed across segments. Know Your Customer (KYC) and identity management will be key in the future of banking to make sure that the frictionless design of on-boarding and user experience is backed by solid antifraud and ID authentication systems. API
5 middleware platforms will be key
Will FinTech Succeed? How
Should Banks Respond?
Banks need to react. Some will respond appropriately – many established financial
services players are already investing heavily into the FinTech sector – some will not and it will be too late. Will FinTech start-ups replace banks? Will all service offerings
5 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
least not in the next 15–20 years.
There is a reason why there is not yet a Facebook of banking or a fully global retail
At the same time banks have to choose what to give up in order to simplify
The Fu Ture o F FinTech252Embracing the Connected
API Economy
By Richard Peers
and Shashi Rana
Previous chapters articulated the importance of connecting established financial
The API Economy: Helping
Financial Services Companies to Build Better Products
Markets and industries are changing faster than ever. Disruption takes many forms
and businesses must grapple with the “innovator’s dilemma”: how to set the pace of change without stumbling over the legacy of the past. They need to embrace new technologies wisely to innovate fast at low cost and low risk. Application Program Interfaces (APIs) offer a powerful way to do this.
The Business Value of APIs
The Rise and Rise of APIs
1 They make it possible for developers to share services and data
Everything is Connected to
Everything Else
of many neurons that interact with each other in a wider value chain. You cannot expect to own the entirety of a consumer’s experience or to participate in all their digital interactions. So the API approach lets you focus on what you do best and connect with others to do the rest.
Getting Started
1 http://www.slideshare.net/3scale/progress-in-the-api-economy-april-2014.
"•	Introducing the API model in small steps;"
"•	Exploring new approaches to development;"
"•	Renting and using an off-the-shelf API management platform."
This approach maximizes flexibility and innovation while reducing risk and
minimizing costs.
Understanding APIs
A company releases its API specifications to the public or chosen third parties
Figure:  APIs everywhere254
"The Fu Ture o F FinTech254•	Developer gets paid. Some companies share revenue with developers. For"
"•	Content syndication. This makes content available to be published by third parties such as the TripAdvisor API which lets travel websites share user reviews."
Drivers of the API Economy
"•	Gartner projects that the total economic value-add from the IoT will be $1.9 trillion"
"•	It is a huge opportunity (see the following Figure) and APIs are critical for getting the most out of internet-connected devices and tapping this market opportunity."
Financial Services Industry
Open or public APIs are the tip of the iceberg; there are many more private APIs
for example:
"•	Integrating content from partners to create opportunities to cross-sell and upsell;"
"•	Creating new lines of business;"
"•	Extending product offerings by using corporate data in new ways;"
across multiple customer touch points;
"•	Delivering services internally in a more efficient way."
API Business Models
APIs can also make money directly or indirectly. There are various business models to choose from:
"•	Free. Companies can open up their API to generate new revenue or share"
How to Join the API Economy:
Companies should embrace APIs in stages over time. If the process is well-
commercial & public sectors
(adopter opportunity)$ 1 .6 T
Incr. revenue by IoT enabled
products & services
add represents the aggregate benefits that businesses derive through the sale and usage of IoT technology.By adding IoT capabilities to
higher prices for their products20 %
Supplier / service providers are
able to offer new associated
services80 %(supplier opportunity)$ 0.3 TWorldwide IoT
Value-add 2020
$ 1 .9 T256
"The Fu Ture o F FinTech256•	Get creative apps and web front-ends built quickly and cheaply."
"•	Rent and use the platform without fully integrating it."
"•	Start by exposing a handful of functions for developers to use."
"•	Leave stubs for future development."
"•	Try “rent-before-buy-before-build” and “configure-before-customize” approaches."
"•	Do not invest heavily in infrastructure and in-house resources for this prototyping"
and rapid development stage.
Existing Middleware is not the
Answer
Most middleware systems do not have the necessary functions to deliver a true API.
"•	Expose data services through well-crafted APIs which are robust and easy to"
scale;
"•	Register and on-board developers;"
"•	Monitor how people are using the APIs with detailed reporting;"
"•	Get insight into customer behaviours;"
"•	Investigate errors and performance problems to improve responsiveness."
The Fu Ture o F FinTech257Banking Like Water
By Frank Sonder
Let us move from the technical aspects of application interfaces (APIs)1 to the
they expect from financial services in the future? In his famous New York Times
interview2 David Bowie described the future of the music industry as “music
Banking is next. Digitalization and intelligent algorithms put the financial
It is time to rethink banking radically – if we need it at all.The futurist Gerd Leonhard suggests asking a very generic question: “Is my
The single most important reason for this is the digitalization of our entire society
that increasingly removes intermediaries from business transactions.
The Middleman Problem
The End of Money
It is money that most clearly symbolizes our personal relationship with banks. One of our first lessons in economics is that there was a barter economy before the invention of currencies. Until then trading goods and services for goods or services was limited to a small community and direct relationships. As trade increased money filled the emerging gap and made it possible to exchange services for money and money for services. But the power of money exceeded that simple mechanism and became what empowered capitalism and particularly the finance capitalism of today. Money became the language of global “turbo-capitalism” and
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected Economy” for further detail about APIs.
2 http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/09/arts/david-bowie-21st-century-entrepreneur.html.258
be just about investment.
But there might soon be a world without money as we know it. As money is such
3 making it the biggest currency worldwide. Approximately 30% of the
The End of Capitalism?
We should stay within the economic context for now and have a closer look at what fundamentally underlies our economic system. Jeremy Rifkin
4 predicts that
Robots Take Over
No Apple Bank Around
The Digital Natives Challenge
3 http://www.theguardian.com/money/2005/jan/08/business.theairlineindustry.
4 Rifkin is the bestselling author of 20 books on the impact of scientific and technological
The Fu Ture o F FinTech259obtaining economic capital and successfully marketing education as our cultural
Money .
was enough just to remember which stone belonged to whom. He states that today there are more elaborate forms of memory which might make money obsolete.
"•	Security as unique selling point"
Another interesting business area for banks might be security. If there is one
What is Wrong with Water?
Banking as a Service
5 banks need to
offer an API (application programming interface) for third parties to show revenue and account balances but most of all to initiate a money transfer. The term usually used for this is “banking as a service”.
Confronted with these and other challenges and with a realistic analysis of the
To end on a positive note let us consider two prospective outlooks for banks of the
future:
"•	Capital exchange"
The first relates to social capital. Philosopher Pierre Bourdieu defined three
The Fu Ture o F FinTech260Eliminating Friction in
Customers’ Financial Lives
By Travers Clarke-Walker
which heralded the Babel Fish – affording its user the ability to understand all languages.
There is often unnecessary complication for the casual user in multiple versions of the
With almost unlimited processing power and data storage in the hands of over
1
This is not a signal that all hope is lost for the banks. Financial institutions have
Mobile banking is a step in the right direction. Its rate of adoption and the value of
transactions being moved are projected to double in the UK by 2020.
mobile banking is transforming low-income people’s access to financial services (though in many cases mobile operators have been the disrupters). Mobile banking demonstrates what is possible when financial institutions deliver products and services that place the customer’s experience at the centre.
Catching Up to the Future
1 http://www.millennialdisruptionindex.com/.
2 http://newsroom.fiserv.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=907511.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech261Change the Prism: Solve the
Friction First
The quantity of possible innovations and their seemingly constant rate of change
And that is the thing of it. Customer adoption is in no way impacted by whether or
how the bank benefits.
Every start-up entrepreneur knows the pitch deck starts with a slide outlining the
problem being solved. This is often referred to as the pain-point or friction. The deck does not outline the start-up’s problem or the investor’s problem. It seeks to address the customer’s problem.
There are arguably few places consumers experience more friction than in
managing their financial lives. Financial institutions that thrive in the future will focus first on the customer’s experience. This is what the competition is doing and what all of the single proposition offerings have figured out.
3 The irony is that
Financial services companies that are able to adapt to the changing pace of
Rethink Product/Service
Development Cycles
4
difficult-to-upgrade system. FinTech is changing fast and it will continue to do so.
Let Someone Else Build It
4 http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_technology/the_rise_of_the_digital_bank.3 Fiserv 2014 Consumer Trends Survey.262
The Fu Ture o F FinTech262Financial institutions have access to extraordinary amounts of unused processing
or transactional friction are the end users’ nemeses. Financial institutions
and
technology providers    around the world would do well to recognize that the future
will be owned by those who make the complexity of life as simple as one currency and one language. This is what the consumer wants and needs. It is where business and services will have to go. It really is that simple.
The future of FinTech is already here. It is enabling financial services that move at
the speed of life. The only question now: who will be participating in it?They know how to layer on existing technology (and they also know when not to).
What financial institutions uniquely have to offer is a cultivated selection of offerings
Anticipate When the Customer Will
The Fu Ture o F FinTech263FinTech is the Future Itself
By David Gyori
Humanity is looking forward to a uniquely exciting period in the long history of
Let’s begin our journey into 2030! Take a seat next to me in this self-driving car!
1st Stop: The Survivors
Do you see these skyscrapers? This is the traditional financial district. Some
Banks remained because institutions taking household deposits on a large scale
Insurers and re-insurers survived because taking on risk collectively and sharing costs
of a negative event within a community creates a structural form that is inevitable.
Asset managers are still here because it makes sense that specialized
professionals create and meticulously manage sizeable units of investments.
2nd Stop: The Cashless Beggar
and human ATMs. You can order cash from your bank and a drone delivers it to you. Peer-to-peer ATMs (aka human ATMs) are apps on your phone. You punch in how much cash you need and choose a person nearby offering that cash for a tiny commission. Money flows from your account through an escrow to the other person’s account. Just like in an Uber-app you see the profile and the rating of the other person.
3rd Stop: The Self-Pay Store
Let’s pop into this supermarket and buy some things. I have opened the self-pay application on my smartphone. You can see it very well: there is no cashier. That is past. People check in the items through their phone and pay by pushing a button. This way we buy more because we don’t have to stand in line and we monitor real-time how much we are spending in our basket. So seamless! I have heard this story of my parents standing in line. I mean what a strange thing: you want to buy stuff and in return the shop makes you stand in line? Absurd. Shoplifters? Each basket of goods has a distinct total weight. Shoplifting is way down.
4th Stop: The Metropolitan
Museum of Plastic Cards
The Metropolitan has the largest collection of plastic cards. This is so much fun!
The Fu Ture o F FinTech264I am glad that you like the exhibition! There is now a really nice temporary
Cruising in Office Mode
We will report a data loss incident to our cloud-insurer. The insurer operates a
Charity donations also have become so much easier. We will use a direct and
We will visit our bank’s virtual branch. Since our society eliminated cash and
"•	A totally virtual branch that we can access via internet – advisors are AI propelled."
"•	A video advisor with either one- or two-way video access."
"•	Augmented branch: a real branch that we can access via internet and get loads of digital info besides being able to video-chat to advisors."
We will also purchase some food for you online. We will pay with a 100% asset-
5th Stop: The Password Memorial
so many people and machines spent their scarce resources on.
6th Stop: The Global Financial
Regulatory Council Headquarters
7th Stop: The FinTech City
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.266
The Fu Ture o F FinTech266A Future Without Money
By Chris Gledhill
Most sci-fi films have one element in common: they are set in some utopian future
They say to predict the future one must look to the past and there is certainly a
Take banking for example – when the internet came along banks looked at
Power is Money
The energy utility market is facing disruption in the form of battery technology.
For an EE to work we need all homes wired into some sort of national grid (already
E = MC
2
£ = MC
2
Challenger Economic Model #2:
Hyper Frugality
To get to this state at least one of two things need to happen.We automate our work (increase supply) – a trend we have witnessed since the
We change our existence model (decrease demand) – another way to disrupt
Challenger Economic Model #3:
Reputational Currency
Banks and other financial services have always looked towards data points beyond
The Fu Ture o F FinTech268members by their respective communities. What we are now seeing is a cross-
Followed through to its natural aggregated conclusion we would end up with one
Reputation Currency (RC) is akin to giving everyone his or her own individual share
With a reputational currency system we start to see retailers price things in an
The three challenger economic models above are not exhaustive but a
The Fu Ture o F FinTech269Ethics in FinTech?
By Huy Nguyen Trieu
But there is an easy solution.
Why is that? It is because finance is at the heart of society and the economy – try
This brings me to ethics and values. It goes without saying that all industries and all
"•	Finance 2.0 will need very strong values and ethics because of its impact on"
society.
"•	FinTech start-ups market themselves as being different from traditional finance – which suffered from lack of ethics – but do not really regard ethics as a priority either."
"•	This is because ethics and values do not have an immediate benefit for the survival and development of start-ups."
"•	Realize that values and ethics have a social and economic impact: for"
"•	Understand that culture is developed from inception: start-up founders need to be aware that whatever values or ethics they have at the beginning of the start-up will have a huge impact down the line."
I think that FinTech CEOs will also be very receptive to including ethics in their
The Fu Ture o F FinTech271Wonga was launched in 2007 and used sophisticated credit scoring models to lend
2
"•	Investors and venture capitalists should demand that their start-ups"
"communicate their values and should not tolerate unethical behaviour.•	Employees should know what the values of the founders are before they make the leap of faith and join a start-up."
"•	Clients should question the values of the start-up."
""
Additional Praise for The Hedge Fund Book
“Those new to the hedge fund industry will beneﬁt immensely from the
chapter devoted to answering frequently asked question about hedge funds
as well as the easy-to-understand explanations of all major areas of hedge
funds throughout the book. Experienced hedge fund professionals readingthis book will also gain valuable insight from other managers and service
providers on current issues facing hedge funds. Whether you are looking
is a must-read.”
“Richard’s new book is a terriﬁc testament to the knowledge that he and
evaluation of where hedge funds are and where they are likely to be heading.”
Storm since the Great Depression .
“Richard Wilson is the best single source for practical answers on the hedge
fund industry. For people new to the industry or considering launching their
“This book caters to hedge fund aspirants as well as ﬁnance professionals.
Richard does a wonderful job of demystifying any misconceptions that the
hedge fund industry faces today. Through a combination of interviews with
books aspire to. To capture the reader in both an enjoyable and informativebook that will soon become a standard in the ﬁnance education industry.”
“The Hedge Fund Book provides an “inside baseball” look at the hedge
fund industry and should be required reading for someone looking to getinto the business.”
Wealth Management“I wish this book had been around when we got started. This piece acceler-
ates the ramping up period for hedge fund management company foundersand executives. Most people think that to have a hedge fund all you need is
a good trader and a Bloomberg terminal. They are shocked when they learn
what it really takes to be successful. This book does a phenomenal job of
explaining and exploring these keys to success.”
“The Hedge Fund Book is one of the few books that speciﬁcally address
is a business just like any brick and mortar store that requires attention
on back/middle ofﬁce functions. The Hedge Fund Book offers practical
insight and advice from seasoned professionals on these overlooked aspectsof a hedge fund business.”
“The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for Professional and Capital
Raising Executives by Richard Wilson is an excellent guide for established
in the administration of best practices of hedge funds and investor relations.”
Fund Book
A Training Manual
for Professionals and
Capital-Raising Executives
RICHARD C. WILSON
Published simultaneously in Canada.
at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any impliedwarranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with aprofessional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
The hedge fund book : a training manual for professionals and capital-raising executives /
Richard Wilson.
p. cm. – (Wiley ﬁnance series)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-52063-5 (cloth)
1. Hedge funds. I. Title.
HG4530.W546 2010
332.64
/prime524–dc22
2010003434
Printed in the United States of America.
a wonderful person and a constant balancing force in my life.
in her makes sure that on some level I work
to live and not live to work.Contents
Preface xi
My Story xii
Disclosure of Financial Interests xiii
Acknowledgments xv
Introduction 1
CHAPTER 1
Hedge Fund Fundamentals 5
Hedge Fund Mechanics and Statistics 6
History of Hedge Funds 8Media Portrayal of Hedge Funds 9
Hedge Fund Ecosystem 10
Future of the Hedge Fund Industry 13Chapter Summary 13
Review Questions 14
CHAPTER 2
Institutionalization and Operations 17
London-Based Hedge Fund 18
Chapter Summary 36Review Questions 36
viiviii CONTENTS
CHAPTER 3
Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 39
Bad News 40
Public Relations Management 41
Educational Marketing 42Forget about Contacting More Investors 43
E-Mail Marketing Best Practices 45
Copy Writing 49Case Proﬁle 50
London-Based Hedge Fund 54
Chapter Summary 60Review Questions 61
CHAPTER 4
The Shooting Star 63
18 Lessons from Shooting Star Hedge Funds 63
Accounting and Compliance International (ACI) 65
Chapter Summary 74
Review Questions 74
CHAPTER 5
Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 77
Top Five Tips for Starting a Hedge Fund 78
Hedge Fund Pitch Book Creation 80
Review Questions 90
CHAPTER 6
Dedicated to Due Diligence 93
Due Diligence Effects on Hedge Funds 102Contents ix
Chapter Summary 105
Review Questions 106
CHAPTER 7
Giant Hedge Funds 109
Best Practices from $1 Billion-Plus Hedge Funds 109
Review Questions 120
CHAPTER 8
Governance Best Practices 123
Capital LLP 124
Chapter Summary 134Review Questions 134
CHAPTER 9
Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 137
Hedge Funds 101 137
Hedge Fund Operations 139Hedge Fund Marketing and Sales 142
Hedge Fund Careers 156
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
Example Due Diligence Questions 171
Questionnaire 171
APPENDIX C
Top Hedge Fund Web Sites 177
Glossary 179
About the Author 185
Index 187
Contact the Author 191Preface
This book was created as a training manual for professionals who work
in the hedge fund industry or who would like to work more closely with
hedge funds as clients or business partners. Over the past seven years I have
read most of the hedge fund books that are available. There are great books
fund managers. This gap in the marketplace and the growing needs of our
Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional (CHP) Designation program is what ledto this book being created.
/squaresolidHow hedge fund managers of any hedge fund may increase their oper-ational effectiveness immediately.
proactive within the right areas can allow a small team to raise a large
amount of capital.
/squaresolidHow to implement governance best practices that will improve investor
some types of fraud.
/squaresolidHow to emulate the best practices of $1 billion-plus giant hedge funds
that have learned many lessons the hard way.
/squaresolidWhy what you read about hedge funds in the general media is off-base80 percent of the time.
/squaresolidHow to double the effectiveness of your capital-raising efforts by focus-
ing on your unique process and positioning more than on your numbers.
/squaresolidHow small to medium-size hedge funds in the real world are improving
their business structure and processes without spending millions on
infrastructure.
The intended audience for this book includes CHP Designation par-
xixii PREFACE
This text should help readers shortcut the process of interviewing 30 hedge
painful lessons learned here within one concise book. If you add up all
than $75.
In addition to the chapters of the book that focus on niche subjects
should help the reader comprehend and absorb the advice provided herein.
referenced through this book. These may be used to supplement universitycourse lectures or sent to team members who may also want to learn more
visit HedgeFundTraining.com.
MY STORY
a currency/commodity-based hedge fund in Europe. I helped them complete
them.
and sales and found myself drawn more to ﬁnding out how to raise capital
and connect with investors. This led me to independently negotiate and signcontracts to raise capital for a boutique investment bank in New York and
one of the early fund of hedge funds groups based out of South Africa.
After working within this area while also consulting within the area of
I was in charge of completing the hands-on marketing of three clients: an
marketing materials taught me a lot about how things should and should
a minimum of $1 million to $3 million a week.
writing strong copy and using educational approaches to marketing to in-
I decided to ﬂy solo and start my own ﬁrm in 2008. We now run three
main product and service lines:
Our ﬁrm and team are small but growing. We have a total of 25 full- and
part-time employees and contractors now who help us offer and constantly
DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS
in the following web sites and resources mentioned within the rest of this
250 hours of consulting advice and over 50 video modules within this bookare worth far more than any distraction by the handful of mentions of the
web sites or services that we provide.Acknowledgments
in everything we have been aiming to accomplish. Thank you to Jonathan
than average.
free educational materials can be attributed directly to Gitomer.
product and service we offer. Thank you for sharing your time and thoughtswith me.
xvIntroduction
What if you sat down with 30 hedge fund veterans and picked their brains?
This is the premise on which I constructed The Hedge Fund Book:
A Training Manual for Professionals and Capital-Raising Executives .
this approach and form of communication; others will surely not.
The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for Professionals and
Capital-Raising Executives will provide many beneﬁts to those seeking to
understand and work in this ﬁeld. Our team at the Hedge Fund Group has
access today. They include:
/squaresolidHedgeFundBlogger.com
/squaresolidHedgeFundsCareer.com
/squaresolidThirdPartyMarketing.com
/squaresolidFamilyOfﬁcesGroup.com
/squaresolidHedgeFundStartupGuru.com
/squaresolidCommoditiesAndFuturesGuide.com
/squaresolidPrimeBrokerageGuide.com
/squaresolidPrivateEquityBlogger.com
those who found value in the resources.
1The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 2 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
to help readers learn more about hedge funds. These interviews and videoswere produced by hedge fund principals and consultants who normally
either do not provide such advice or typically charge $200 to $475 per hour
for their time. My hope is that the value of these additional resources alone
will be worth more than what you paid to obtain this book. If you add up
the 250-plus hours that went into putting this book together with all of the
resources included in this text and how they operate:
/squaresolidInterviews . Over 20 interviews complete this training manual for the
individual readers do not need to interview all of them directly.
/squaresolidVideo resources. We have also created a series of over 40 video resources
which act as a supplement to this training manual. Throughout this book
/squaresolidFrequently asked questions. Our team at the Hedge Fund Group has
about 40 of the most frequent of these questions to create Chapter 9 of
this book. Some professionals may ﬁnd this resource more valuable than
the rest of the chapter-by-chapter instruction and interview content.
/squaresolidWhy important. Each chapter begins with a short section on why the
chapter is critical to the health and growth of the hedge fund as a
business. This provision guides the reader as to which chapters will bemost relevant to his particular career or business.
/squaresolidChapter review questions. Each chapter concludes with several review
questions for those professors and trainers who have agreed to use thismanual as part of their university course. These will also be helpful
for those who are completing the hedge fund training and certiﬁcation
program referred to in this text as the Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional(CHP) Designation Program (www.HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com).
I recently participated in a training session with Eben Pagan in Los
Angeles at a marketing conference on how business is typically conducted.He told an interesting story. Eben spoke about how the streets in Boston
are actually old cow paths that the city decided to just pave over to create
the roads of the city. The result is a very complicated maze of one-wayIntroduction 3
streets that really only make sense to the most veteran cab drivers. This
is not the cows’ fault. They simply walked typically in the direction ofleast resistance. Nobody stepped back and looked at where the cows had
wandered and asked if there was a better way to get the project done—they
simply followed where cows had walked in the past.
a super highway straight toward your goal.
accomplishing it.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Hedge Fund Fundamentals
Training is everything. The peach was once a bitter almond;
cauliﬂower is nothing but cabbage with a college education.
—Mark Twain
and provides a context for the content of this book. In this chapter I brieﬂy
and the future of hedge funds.
Why important : This chapter is the foundation for the rest of this book.
What this chapter is not : This book is not a thorough review of hedge
fund investment strategies or analytics; those topics are already covered in
Fund Professional (CHP) Designation Program. See these required books
and other recommendations at HedgeFundBookstore.com.
What isa hedge fund? The one-sentence deﬁnition of a hedge fund is
“a private investment vehicle that charges its investors two types of fees: a
management fee and a performance fee.” Any more speciﬁc deﬁnition will
The management fee is a standard fee based on total assets under manage-ment and it typically runs between 1 and 2 percent. The second type of fee
typically charged by hedge funds is a performance fee; typically this is 10 to
20 percent and is charged based on the performance achieved by the fund.If a hedge fund has 10 percent positive performance for a single year and its
5The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for
Professionals and Capital-Raising Executives
by Richard C. Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Richard C. Wilson 6 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
achieving these positive returns for their investors.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
HEDGE FUND MECHANICS AND STATISTICS
charge 3 percent. Wide variations in performance fee levels may also be
seen. One important aspect of this dual-level fee structure is the incentiveit sets in place for hedge fund managers. While many hedge fund managers
remunerating the managers based on positive performance and not just totalassets under management rewards those who can achieve consistent year-
after-year gains. This in turn leads to rich compensation for those who can
for a hedge fund as he could working for a similar size mutual fund or
long-only optimization ﬁrm.
Investments made in hedge funds are typically seen as medium to long
term for several reasons. The main reason is liquidity. Most hedge funds
for as long as three years after the initial investment is made. A lock-up
period simply means that the investor may not redeem his invested fundsuntil this period has expired. These lock-up periods are put into place so
that the hedge fund may invest in various assets and will have more control
and ﬂexibility in the timing of its purchasing and selling of these assets over
drawback by institutions and high net worth (HNW) investors. While thisHedge Fund Fundamentals 7
these are two areas worth additional research if this topic is of interest tothe reader.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Liquidity
Additional Common Hedge Fund Terms
/squaresolidHurdle rate : A hurdle rate is a set performance ﬁgure that must
hurdle rate set at 3 percent so that any performance above 3 percent
will be considered outperformance. Hurdle rates avoid having investorspay high fees for low-single-digit portfolio performance.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
/squaresolidHigh-water mark: A high-water mark is a tool by which hedge fund
managers can assure investors that they will not be charged performance8 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
fees after portfolio losses until the fund has made up those past losses.
paying the performance fee until the manager has made up the ground
he previously lost in the portfolio.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
High
set forth in the contract. This term has been highly debated recently due
to hundreds of funds “closing the gate” or enacting this clause in theiragreements with investors.
HISTORY OF HEDGE FUNDS
hedge fund in 1949 while working for Fortune . The fund was started on the
belief that the movements of individual securities were due to both the per-
formance of that speciﬁc security and the performance of the broader mar-kets. His strategy was to address this by investing in securities that seemed
selling those securities that seemed likely to underperform the market. Thegoal was to neutralize or cancel out market risk by allowing the portfolio
to hedge against negative market movements. This is how the ﬁrst hedge
This new method of managing portfolios of equities started becoming
in existence managing close to $1 billion in assets. Some early hedge fund
and other types of assets.
and performance fees as the only common denominator. Even this deﬁni-
tion is now becoming dated as more hedge funds and ﬁrms that run hedgefunds become publicly traded companies. Hedge funds are hard to under-
stand as a whole because they are diverse and somewhat secretive. Hedge
from their competition. The hedge fund industry is very competitive and
entrepreneurial.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/History
MEDIA PORTRAYAL OF HEDGE FUNDS
dustry in terms of ethics or performance that makes the headlines each day.
Hedge funds are now mentioned in thousands of magazines and newspapers
each month.
largely caused by reading mainstream news sources on the topic. Here arethe top three misconceptions caused by the media:
1.Hedge funds are large multibillion-dollar investment vehicles that can
destroy companies. Reality : While the largest of hedge funds do control10 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
made up of mostly $1 million to $200 million size hedge fund managers.
2.Hedge funds are not regulated. Reality : Many hedge funds are already
regulated at the asset level based on what they are investing in.
3.Hedge funds are always committing fraud and blowing up their funds.
Reality : Less than 0.1 percent of the industry is ever accused of any
hedge fund failures are actually due to operational business reasons andnot performance-related issues.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Media
HEDGE FUND ECOSYSTEM
Hedge fund managers do not work in a vacuum where they coordinate
directly with investors and receive no assistance from outside parties. Most
hedge fund managers work with at least three of the ﬁve types of service
providers shown in Figure 1.1.
It is important to know the function of each of these parties to under-
assets. Here are deﬁnitions and explanations for each of these serviceprovider types:
1.Prime brokerage . Prime brokers provide a package of services typi-
cally within the largest business of an investment bank. The following
2.Fund administration . Fund administration ﬁrms provide support and
of fund expenses.Hedge Fund Fundamentals 11
Prime
Brokerage
Fund
Administration
Third Party
MarketingLegal and
ComplianceAuditing
Hedge Fund
Manager
FIGURE 1.1 Types of Service Providers Used by Hedge Funds
3.Third Party marketing . Third party marketing ﬁrms are independent
hedge fund marketing consultants who work to raise capital for two toﬁve or more hedge funds at any one point in time for a single source of
some sort of retainer along with sharing of 20 percent of both the
management and performance fees while the funds raised stay invested.
4.Legal and compliance . Legal and compliance ﬁrms become more im-
5.Auditing. Auditing ﬁrms are used by hedge funds on a quarterly and
annual basis to verify their performance and accounting ﬁgures. Some
hedge funds use auditing ﬁrms for monthly checks or to prepare for an
annual audit as well.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Ecosystem12 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Top Four Hedge Fund Industry Trends
Understanding the hedge fund industry requires knowing what is going on
trends:
1.Recent poor absolute hedge fund performance and fraud has led to in-
creasing pressure from investors for additional transparency and levelsof governance. This is being done to ensure that managers adhere to
now required by many investors and boards of advisers.
2.The collapse of Lehman Brothers left some hedge funds in London with-
brokers and vice versa. Some newcomers to the industry are now gain-ing strong market share because they are seen as a safe place to do
business.
third-party marketing ﬁrms is on the rise. The capital-raising environ-
4.Investors increasingly want to work with more institutional hedge fund
managers. This typically means hedge funds with over $100 million to
that have $1 billion in assets under management. This has always
the knowledge needed to create a more institutional-quality hedge fundoperation.Hedge Fund Fundamentals 13
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Trends
FUTURE OF THE HEDGE FUND INDUSTRY
was taken seriously by only a handful of professionals who actually worked
in the industry. The future of the hedge fund industry is actually bright dueto several short- and long-term factors.
The strongest argument for the strength of the hedge fund industry is the
and they know that they will be rewarded handsomely for doing so. The
combination of relatively low barriers of entry and direct ﬁnancial rewardsare a formula for continued growth and natural positive evolution of the
industry as a whole.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Future
CHAPTER SUMMARY
mance fee structures to further align the interests of the investor with the
hedge fund portfolio manager and principal.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.What is a hedge fund?
a.A private investment partnership that typically includes the manager
of the portfolio receiving both a management and performance fee.
b.A private equity fund that also employs hedging tactics using equity
securities.
c.A private investment partnership that is 100 percent unregulated and
can use leverage to produce higher absolute returns for investors.
d.The roles of the speciﬁc board members.
2.Which of the following is not one of the top trends affecting the hedge
fund industry right now?
a.Investors are seeking to work with more institutional-quality fund
managers.
such as third-party marketers and investor databases is on the rise.
c.Most hedge fund managers are now outsourcing their portfolio man-
account in the hedge fund.
portant to the operations and effectiveness of a hedge fund business.
it is likely that another large market swing could eliminate the industry
completely.
4.Hedge funds typically charge a percent management fee and
percent performance fee.
the portfolio due to market illiquidity or speciﬁc sets of circumstances
set forth in the contract.
6.True or false: Hedge funds are the one type of investment that is com-
restricted to institutional and accredited investors.
7.Most of the hedge fund industry is made up of managers who manage
between and in assets under management (AUM).
started the ﬁrst hedge fund in 1949 while working for Fortune .
9.A lock-up period is often put in place so that
a.A hedge fund may invest in various assets and will have more control
and ﬂexibility in the timing of its purchasing and selling of theseassets.
b.A hedge fund may lock up an investor into investing only in its fund
may be shared with other managers in the industry.
c.An investor can lock in his investment with the hedge fund and be
guaranteed additional capacity in the hedge fund for the next two to
three years after his initial investment. This is most commonly used
by institutional investors.
invested in for an average of six to nine weeks and offer liquidity on
a weekly basis. This is why the industry has been able to quickly gainassets for institutional investors of many types.
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 2
Institutionalization
and Operations
The most important contribution management needs to make
in the twenty-ﬁrst century is to increase the productivity
of knowledge work and the knowledge worker.
—Peter F. Drucker
Astudy in 2006 by Capco shows that at least half of hedge fund failures
are due to operational reasons rather than performance reasons. This
runs contrary to what most would expect. To make matters more challeng-
tions from experts in the industry.
may be employed as a fund’s business grows. One thing is certain: If you are
how to improve the institutional quality of your hedge fund will result in
a loss of assets to those who do understand and adapt to the institutional
demands on hedge funds.
The hedge fund industry is becoming simultaneously more competitive
and diverse. A fund manager starting business today will face more hurdles
keepers. One of the most difﬁcult ongoing challenges for managers from$1 million to $1 billion in assets under management (AUM) is the con-
stant need to increase the institutional quality of the hedge fund’s portfolio
17The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 18 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
chapter is meant to help ﬁll that void in the industry and provide some tan-
gible steps that managers can take to improve their processes and operations.
MARKETING FOR A LONDON-BASED HEDGE FUND
the ﬁve top things that you believe hedge fund managers can do to become
more institutional?
Stephen Abrahams: I believe that the top ﬁve things hedge funds managers
can do would be:
1.Understand their strengths and weaknesses—know what their unique
selling proposition (USP) really is.
2.Have better than average marketing materials and sale literature that
is constructed by someone who knows what investors are looking for.
The managers can then concentrate on what they are good at by trading
and managing the portfolio.
4.Take the long-term view and invest long-term; institutions take their
time to make decisions.
Richard Wilson: Great. That sounds like good advice. Many of the hedge
fund managers I speak with are still trying to raise capital without any
process can also help improve fund operations and positioning as an insti-tutional quality fund. Many investors want to become more institutional
to attract more capital to their funds. Is there any magic bullet that you
have found to attract capital while you still have a small AUM?Institutionalization and Operations 19
isn’t easy and it takes a long time and a lot of hard work to accomplish.
industry would consider a fund with over $100 million in AUM as coming
out of the emerging manager zone.
I once had the fun job of calling every single institutional consulting ﬁrm
in the United States—over 200 of them. At that time I was raising capital
for a $600 million fund of hedge funds and a $10 million long/short fund.What I found was that over 95 percent of these consultants who represent
large institutional investors require that you have $100 million or more in
won’t get any real asset-growing traction with most of them until you get to
CAPITAL LIMITED
Our next interview is with Bob Pardo of Pardo Capital Limited. Mr. Pardo
has been a commodity trading adviser since 1996 and has worked with
Their investment strategies are based on their proprietary Walk-Forward
doing related to trading or operations that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position20 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
as a high-quality fund management business? Any lessons or tips to share
on this point?
Bob Pardo: I would not say that we have stopped doing anything. I would
say that we have reprioritized our research and development process to
get viable products out there when they are in a form that is of interest to
our investment space.
a hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institution-alizing a hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research?
Pedigree?
Bob Pardo: It depends where the hedge fund is to start. They are all im-
institutional quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smaller
investors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?Any lessons learned here?
Bob Pardo: The only real lesson to be learned here is the realization
of all types who will not be able to deal with you for a whole range of
Richard Wilson: What operational resources does your ﬁrm leverage or use
to help outsource work or improve the efﬁciency of the work your fundfaces to keep business moving forward each month?
Bob Pardo: We outsource a lot and it has its pros and cons. It is ideal for
outsourcing can often be done quite cost effectively.
sourced many functions. It almost never makes sense to do everything
raising or marketing training?
attracting proven talent. We feel that we can bring a lot to the table with
our number one resource. They represent stability and the potential for
future growth
Richard Wilson: That will be refreshing for some young professionals to
us regarding the CHP Designation have the view that if they didn’t com-
plete two or three hedge fund internships and obtain some sort of entry
Do you recommend that hedge fund start-ups begin raising capital from
well. The industry has changed dramatically over the past several years.
A two- to four-year track record is no longer a necessity in many cases.Pedigree and the proverbial “good story” carry a lot more weight these
days.
Richard Wilson: I agree. There are two main reasons why I think it is never
What is the critical issue that decides whether you work with a par-
that you always look for? Good service? Recommendations from others?
Branding? Experience?
Bob Pardo: Experience and credibility and the ability for the service provider
the exact service that we need.
EZE CASTLE INTEGRATION
vestment ﬁrms. Leading a talented team of customer service and engineering
ties include service delivery and business development for the ﬁrm.
erational improvement trends that you are seeing with your hedge fundclients?
Vinod Paul: What I see is that they are reinvesting their tools. These start out
as nice-to-haves and then turn into must-haves. An example of this is ordermanagement systems. Smaller ﬁrms with just one or two prime brokers
were nice-to-haves and now are need-to-haves are customer relationship
management (CRM) tools—they need this to manage investor reporting.
Richard Wilson: I have found that SalesForce.com is the most popular CRM
tool for hedge funds today. What have you seen?
Vinod Paul: We see a variety and offer our own CRM solution. This is
issue with SalesForce.com is that it is very vanilla. It was not created forhedge funds and investment ﬁrms exclusively.
Richard Wilson: Are hedge funds missing the boat on operational best prac-
tices? Any advice?
Vinod Paul: The dynamics are changing. Hedge funds used to launch with
month and who should be doing it. There are now outsourcing services
Richard Wilson: You work with literally hundreds of hedge funds who are
always reinvesting in their infrastructure and operations. Any low-hanging
fruit in terms of institutionalization? Low-cost actions?
don’t see many funds doing: Large hedge funds do business continuity
month. The large funds understand the importance of business continuity
planning as it ties to disaster recovery. Most funds should be doing this.Institutionalization and Operations 23
Richard Wilson: Great piece of advice. That sounds like one more puzzle
piece that hedge fund managers can clue into within this book in terms ofﬁguring out the 20 to 30 things they are not doing but could be to become
a more institutional-quality organization.
what is the most common bottleneck for further growth of individual
hedge funds?
Vinod Paul: The biggest challenge is that nobody wants to be the ﬁrst one in.
Every investor wants to go in with others. One person had ﬁve investors
come in at one time so that nobody was the ﬁrst group to put their toe in
the water. I thought that was a unique approach that I don’t see very often.
Richard Wilson: What do you see in terms of growing a track record before
marketing a hedge fund? Are professionals building up three- to four-year
perhaps immature operations in place?
Vinod Paul: A track record is of huge importance. Most small funds are
now starting much smaller than they wanted to. Lots of them are working
and not based on raising a large amount of short-term money. I think the
wanting at least six months of proof. The investor wants to make sure the
manager has something at stake as well in the hedge fund business.
Richard Wilson: Have you seen any uptick in action within the hedge fund
start-up space? Our team has seen dozens of managers moving from in-
vestment banks and trading roles into launching their own hedge fund
business.
starting a hedge fund. Many professionals are leaving large organizations
and are making investments and taking that risk now. A lot of individuals
are taking this risk.
Richard Wilson: What would you suggest are the top three types of tools
that are most powerful or useful for hedge fund managers to use in their
business?
Vinod: Most hedge fund managers are not educated on the full array of
tools are out there and they are affordable. A few years ago infrastructure
an enterprise-level infrastructure. We can split that up and offer even just
advantage of this as they grow in order to get more done with fewer
dollars. The top three tools I would suggest relate to:
case of something happening.
Richard Wilson: What trends do you see within the $1 billion-plus hedge
fund space? What are they investing in?
Vinod Paul: Due to the size of their business they do not need every tool for
tools and being smart about their investments. They have larger teams so
about what they are doing because they have most expertise in-house and
more choices in the marketplace.
Richard Wilson: Any last pieces of advice for hedge fund managers or pro-
fessionals in the industry?
Vinod Paul: I deal with a lot of start-ups and professionals who are starting
a hedge fund. I think the most successful guys are those who educate
this is a huge beneﬁt to hedge fund managers who now can pay much lessthan they may have just ﬁve to seven years ago. Every manager should
run and infrastructure is built.
viewed Nakul Nayyar from a U.S.-based hedge fund manager. He sharedhis experience on creating a more institutional-quality trading environment.Institutionalization and Operations 25
Richard Wilson: Could you please explain your professional background in
Nakul Nayyar: I graduated in 2002 from Johns Hopkins University into
what was a difﬁcult job environment. My ﬁrst job out of school was
500 company. After a few years of executing projects all over the North-
landed a trading assistant role at a proprietary trading ﬁrm. My role was
mixture of event-driven fundamentals and technical analysis. Addition-
to research my own ideas and strategies and have these implemented.
scrap existing strategies. The experience of creating a strategy through
its life cycle (including sometimes its death) was extremely valuable andshaped my philosophy on trading immensely.
Richard Wilson: Thanks for sharing. It is interesting that you worked in
the family ofﬁce environment. I think that the experience of working
in a family ofﬁce is very valuable and often underestimated. I see such a
getting into the family ofﬁce industry.
How can a hedge fund manager improve the institutional feel and efﬁ-
ciency of his trading environment? Do you have a few methods or exam-
ples of how this can be accomplished?
Nakul Nayyar: A professional web site with password access is relatively
allows all interested parties to quickly ﬁnd your ﬁrm online and provides
a perception of professionalism. Try to provide real content on the siteand not some generic marketing talk to get interest. Spend some time on26 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
the bios as well; people are generally most interested in the background
of the managers.
and do a number of other very useful functions without a lot of additional
hiring programmers has become cheaper and cheaper.
Hire or learn quantitative measures and testing techniques even if the
strategy is completely discretionary. Not only can it yield positive results
valued much more highly than a keen eye or nicely annotated charts.
Richard Wilson: That is great advice—so many nuggets there I’m afraid that
I think that providing genuinely valuable content is even more effective. Ithelps build a relationship and position your fund principles or traders as
experts and authorities in the space. This goes a long way with investors
programmers through a web site called Elance.com. It is a great resource
that I have just started using for our ﬁrm.
Many other experts whom I interview in this book refer to carefully
providers can lend you and the tools and reporting services they can also
make sure they actually follow through once everything is said and done.
fund professional.
fund so we know the perspective from which you are answering these
questions?Institutionalization and Operations 27
Hendrik Klein: I am CEO and founder of Da Vinci Invest. My specialization
kets with a macro-like approach) or commodity trading adviser (CTA).
This is because we trade listed options and futures mainly. Our current
total in this strategy.
European-based hedge fund manager running this type of a strategy.
What operational resources does your ﬁrm leverage or use to help out-
source work or improve the efﬁciency of the work your fund faces to keepbusiness moving forward each month?
Hendrik Klein: Da Vinci Invest is domiciled in a so-called hedge fund hotel .
Richard Wilson: Hedge fund hotels have a mixed reputation here in the
out what services they provide to emerging fund managers. What servicesdoes the hedge fund hotel provide for you right now?
tenance. Software development is outsourced to IFIT and other outsidecompanies.
Richard Wilson: How important do you see service providers being to the
success of your fund? What process have you used to select these ser-
both the large and small service providers that your ﬁrm has worked
with?
Hendrik Klein: We underestimated the service providers’ part in the past. It is
(NAV) in time and accurately. Additional services like sales fee calculationwould be perfect. In the beginning we had an administrator who delivered
NAV six to eight weeks too late. Our auditors never managed to ﬁnish
the audit in the ﬁrst or second quarter.
Richard Wilson: That certainly doesn’t make things any easier while trying
to grow your business. What was the result of that lack of service?
Hendrik Klein: One family ofﬁce did not invest because of that. We lost a
lot of reputation or credibility because of that.
pay attention and not underestimate the power of having solid service
provider relationships and processes in place. So many times I stress the
What is the critical issue that decides whether you work with a par-
that you always look for? Good service? Recommendations from others?
Branding? Experience?
clients at the same time. The marketing should be done in good and in
bad times.
Richard Wilson: What are the top three resources or tools that you use to
run your hedge fund that are worth more than anything else? What are
the most valuable resources that you could recommend to others?
test scenarios. We can recommend all of these to hedge fund managers.
Richard Wilson. I have come to ﬁnd that Salesforce is the leading CRM
system for fund managers—it helped me raise capital as well. What is the
most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-month operations?
How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What tools have you foundthat help you manage this?
Hendrik Klein: Positive performance every month end. A strict risk manage-
ment helps.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other pieces of advice related to opera-
tional hedge fund best practices that you could share with other managers
in the industry?
Hendrik Klein: Separate operational power between portfolio management
and risk management.
Richard Wilson: What are your top ﬁve tips for hedge fund managers who
have less than $100 million in assets under management but would like
to improve the institutional quality of their fund?
Hendrik Klein: I actually have several suggestions for hedge fund managers
who want to increase their institutional operations and trading:
/squaresolidList your fund on a stock exchange.
/squaresolidSelect the best service providers.
/squaresolidGet due diligence reports.
/squaresolidGet awards.
that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position as a high-quality fund managementbusiness? Any lessons or tips to share on this point?
Hendrik Klein: I would have to say not selling straddles. We do not take
unlimited risks anymore.Institutionalization and Operations 29
hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institutionalizinga hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
investment process are the most important things. Anything you can do
to upgrade the pedigree of the team helps.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on institutionalization and the importance of trans-
Richard Wilson: I completely agree. One of the top three reasons this book
was put together is that I believe hedge fund managers would like to hear
traders can feel somewhat alone in the industry and in their plans or chal-lenges. Yet nowadays almost everyone I speak with is trying to upgrade
their team pedigree and the caliber of their operations. This is one of the
processes regardless of assets under management.
The next interview on institutionalization was with Sheri Kanesaka of
U.S. securities laws and regulations for both private and public offerings.
operational changes are you seeing being made?
external party do the fund administration such as the month-end investor
provide some oversight by reporting on the funds’ books and records to
and so on. Most common is a monthly analysis and report.
Richard Wilson: I have seen the same trend. I have even spoken to board
members of hedge funds who are now requiring their funds to use external
administration ﬁrms or they will withdraw their board membership. I
don’t see this trend slowing down anytime soon.
Your ﬁrm works with many large hedge fund managers and asset man-
agement clients. Where do you see many of these ﬁrms investing their
money back into? What could smaller funds learn from this?
Sheri Kanesaka: It is harder in this downturn (2008–2009) to access talent on
in this more challenging environment.
is a seasoned executive manager with over 15 years of operational man-
agement experience. Mr. Warshal spent 12 years with Cox Enterprises(a Fortune 200 company). He held various management positions in the
science in marketing from the University of Florida and a master of business
administration from Emory’s Goizueta Business School.
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you now see hedge
funds picking up that are a new trend in the industry?
an increase in the demand for cash management services that entail the
administrator acting as a signatory for wire transfers on behalf of the fund.Institutionalization and Operations 31
This is directly reﬂective of the need to provide current and prospective
investors with a level of conﬁdence that the proper checks and balancesare in place which prevent the opportunity for fraudulent activities to
engaging in the best practice of hiring administrators to provide their
investors and prospective investors with the conﬁdence that an objective
third party is validating their returns.
Richard Wilson: I’m glad you brought up the wire transfer and validation of
are able to identify trends that occur in the trading of our clients. We
notice that funds that properly utilize leverage seem to grow quicker than
Richard Wilson: I have seen similar things happen to very risky portfolios.
I’ve worked closely on the third-party marketing and capital introduc-
ﬁrms deny clients service if they are betting more than they are investing.
Nobody wants to be associated with a manager aiming at 30 percent a
month returns.
spective where should hedge fund managers be reinvesting their money to
improve their operations?
Eric Warshal: Fund managers are realizing that there are both operational
efﬁciencies and cost efﬁciencies associated with analyzing which opera-
tions can and should be accommodated for in-house and which should be
outsourced. Fund managers can take advantage of consulting ﬁrms who
Additionally there exists the added beneﬁt of potentially becoming moreappealing to institutional investors by virtue of properly outsourcing cer-
certain operations are being handled by experienced professionals.
Richard Wilson: I think that documenting each key process your ﬁrm under-
takes and making sure you have solid reasons for keeping each individual
process in-house is an exercise every fund should walk through. What32 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
operational best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds imple-
menting that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Eric Warshal: Proper due diligence is something that most small hedge funds
plus hedge funds take their time when deciding where and when to in-
funds that solely rely upon the experience and intuition of their managersoftentimes only provide cursory levels of due diligence when making some
fund investment decisions.
Richard Wilson: This is a topic that I touch on in detail in Chapter 6.
allocating the capital and ﬁnding the time will always be the bottleneck
in the industry to actually implementing these best practices.
The ﬁnal short interview for this chapter on institutionalization and oper-
than 500 hedge fund managers each year. Their experience is in working
with $300 million to $1 billion-plus hedge funds as well as emerging hedgefund managers and start-ups.
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you now see hedge
funds picking up that are a new trend in the industry?
Lance Baraker: There are several areas that a hedge fund needs to set up for
operational best practices.
/squaresolidManagers need to understand the risk proﬁle of their fund and determine
their institutional investors risk reports on demand and set up at least a
weekly report going through the key risk metrics.
/squaresolidHedge fund managers should also segregate the duties of risk out to
more than one person in their ﬁrm. That way the person picking the
stocks is not the one determining the risk of the fund.
and multiple prime brokers in a single integrated platform in real time.
This trend is also to have a real-time reporting system that can be accessed
segregation of risk and portfolio management duties is probably the least
common suggestion I have seen actually implemented. This is something
that I believe many $30 million-plus hedge funds could achieve buthaven’t yet.
tional investors.
/squaresolidThe hedge fund managers who understand their demands will be the
most successful.
/squaresolidRight now daily or weekly transparency is essential.
/squaresolidI would reinvest capital in technology that could produce daily reports.
service to groups in the industry. Managers must have a written com-
pliance manual and have a clear process in place for handling conﬂicts
of interest in the hedge fund.
/squaresolidI would also suggest the manager do a monthly call with investors to
discuss the performance of the fund and thoughts on the strategy.
/squaresolidQualitative discussions are just as important as the quantitative reports.
Richard Wilson: I and several of the hedge fund managers and consultants I
have interviewed strongly agree. You really need to understand your end34 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
which is congruent with who they would like to invest in.
take some notes down on the bullet points listed by Lance Baraker and startcreating a to-do list for your fund. Start with what can be implemented this
week and make sure that it is done in a way that ensures the new processes
or controls will be carried out consistently each week or month.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds
implementing that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Lance Baraker: I don’t think smaller hedge funds are ignoring any best
smaller hedge funds are usually one- or two-man shops that wear many
functions. This would save the smaller hedge fund time and money and
still fulﬁll the best practices methodology it needs to be successful.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Institutional
Richard Wilson: True. Larger hedge funds can have 10 or 100 times the bud-
get of an emerging hedge fund manager. I think outsourcing your noncore
activities is the right way to go. I recently spoke with a fund manager inBoston at one of our Hedge Fund Premium networking events about this
carried out to run their fund. They have decided to outsource 15 of these.
Most funds I know don’t document every process they are carrying out
and do not cleanly outsource them in this type of a strategic fashion. If
you do it right it could have a few layers worth of beneﬁts to investorswho may be interested in examining your operations and what you do or
do not keep in-house.Institutionalization and Operations 35
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on documenting operational hedge fund pro-
also been a trader for over 20 years. How do you see larger funds operating
in more institutional quality structures and how can small to medium-size
funds beneﬁt from your perspective?
are not aware of what best practices they should be employing. It justcomes down to economics and the amount of actual business they have
to spread to the street.
tation of true multi-prime functionality. The price to incorporate the risk
to move assets between primes and extract more favorable fees than the
smaller funds. This also gives the allocators that feeling of safety across
custodians. We are growing our current business on the fact that many
small to medium-size hedge funds just haven’t historically had the amount
Richard Wilson: What should very quickly growing hedge funds of $100 mil-
lion invest their money in as they grow? What is most important?
hedge fund as they grow is investing in talent. This is extremely importantwhen implementing systems. Good systems are only as good as the ability
for them to be functional. The biggest complaint I hear from the bigger
can increase alpha and decrease risk. Having an experienced derivatives
trader is paramount—their ability to generate alpha and help a fundmanage risk is one of the key additions when the resources are available.
With the attrition of the trading ﬂoors and the advanced technology in
much more cost-effective and an absolute must as a fund walks up the
ladder.
fessionals that we interview here work closely with so many different
hedge funds in the industry.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Within this chapter we heard from many professionals who collectively have
well over 100 years of experience within the industry. Here are some quick
tips directly from their transcripts:
/squaresolidTake the long-term view when planning out infrastructure andoperations.
site in place.
/squaresolidInvest in talent and possibly a derivatives trader with risk management
experience.
/squaresolidMost funds are considered institutional when they have over $80 or
$100 million in AUM.
/squaresolidDon’t underestimate service providers—they are business partners who
can make or break your business.
and due diligence reports.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: A study by Capco in 2006 shows that more hedge funds
fail due to poor performance and portfolio blow-up than for operational
reasons.
2.Which of the following is not a piece of advice from Stephen Abrahams
on improving hedge fund operations and capital-raising processes?
b.Have better than average marketing materials and sales literature.
c.Employ a third-party marketer or in-house sales professional.
d.Fire your service providers and bring all of your operational work
in-house to make sure everything is done the right way.Institutionalization and Operations 37
3.What AUM levels are typically considered the beginning of what a
mature or institutional-quality ﬁrm would manage?a.Over $25 million AUM.
b.Over $80 or $100 million AUM.
c.Over $250 million AUM.
d.Over $300 million AUM.
4.Hendrik Klein from Da Vinci Invest operates inside a hedge fund hotel.
tenance.
5.True or false: Working with the wrong service provider can result in
lost investors for a hedge fund.
6.True or false: Within this chapter we suggest keeping risk and portfolio
departments may lead to many problems for a hedge fund business.
7.Since the Madoff case it has become
popular for hedge funds
to use independent fund administration ﬁrms.
a.Less.
b.More.
8.Lance Baraker suggests that monitoring risk within a T +1 format is:
a.Now a best practice and should be available to all hedge fund
managers.
b.Now the industry standard and just now becoming available.
c.Not adequate anymore.
9.Within this chapter it is suggested that or transparency
helps ease investor concerns.
a.Monthly or annual.
b.Weekly or monthly.
c.Daily or weekly.
d.Weekly or quarterly.
10. True or false: William Katts suggests that talent is an overrated resource
that small hedge funds spend too much money on.
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 3
Hedge Fund Marketing Pro
There are three ways to raise capital: having more high net worth
based hedge fund manager. Tassini Capital Management was attempting to
grow its assets from $39.2 million in assets under management (AUM) to
$250 million in AUM in a three-year period. The case study outlines the
found for raising capital from new investors. This chapter provides some
strategies until they worked. Studying this chapter carefully can save liter-
team will likely repeat mistakes that others often make while trying to grow
their AUM.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
39The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 40 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BAD NEWS
The bad news is there is no magic bullet to raising capital. I spoke with
at least a dozen managers recently at a Hedge Fund Premium networking
event in Chicago regarding their capital-raising plans. Most were looking
that managers are seeing between them and the AUM levels they are trying
to achieve.
Daily action and discipline are the best things that fund managers can do
to raise capital. They must take responsibility for marketing their fund and
they will forever remain in the bottom 20 percent of the industry in termsof assets. Very few funds gain their initial assets through a superpowerful
third-party marketing ﬁrms. Third-party marketers typically like to work
with managers who have some AUM momentum or foundation underneath
them.
those of their competitors. This means superior investor cultivation processes
they do need to strategically plan their marketing campaigns to compete
effectively.
over.
great quote I hear every morning is connected to an interview Brian Tracyconducts in which a multimillionaire says that success is easy: “You must
competition.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 41
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on third-party marketing please type this URL into
your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/3PM
PUBLIC RELATIONS MANAGEMENT
Public relations has to be one of the most ignored marketing tools of hedgefund managers today. The Hedge Fund Group has worked with over three
dozen hedge funds on their marketing plans and capital-raising efforts. So
This is not to say that any hedge fund that is not publishing at least four
beneﬁt by simply making themselves more available to the press.
prospects lie ahead for the industry as a whole.
Many hedge fund managers shy away from contributing to stories in the
press. I would strongly encourage you to speak with your legal counsel and
see if they would approve of your discussions with the media if you stick to
seeing in the industry.
Top Four Tips for Taking Advantage of Public Relations for Your Hedge
Fund
1.Speak to your legal counsel to check on exactly what you can or cannot
say to the press.
2.Develop a list of 10 to 15 targeted publications that you would like to
appear in. Identify the editors of ﬁnancial columns in those publicationsor news sources and introduce yourself to them as a resource.
in the industry where you will be heard not only by others in the industry
but probably by a few members of the press as well.
4.Consider writing a book on your insights and experience. Many profes-
sionals in the hedge fund industry are often interviewed on TV after they42 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
also why it would be so effective to consider doing so. Those with the
time and skills to write well are often not the same ones who have the
experience and insight to write something unique and valuable.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
EDUCATIONAL MARKETING
One of the most effective ways you can market your hedge fund is by beingfour times more educational and easy to understand than your competition.
I wrote in my blog last year that a recent survey had shown that over 78 per-
cent of institutional investors will not invest in something that they cannotunderstand. I would imagine that for high net worth (HNW) investors this
ﬁgure is even higher.
While some managers purposely position their fund to appear “black
the 500-foot-views that are so often used. The trick in doing this right is to
balance providing enough detail and real meat that an institutional investor
hedge fund strategies of portfolio management techniques.
Here is a list of four additional ways you may market your hedge fund
in a more educational or simple way:
1.PowerPoint. Dedicate 20 percent of the PowerPoint presentation to
educational content. Asterisk all industry terms and note that deﬁnitions
are provided in the back of the presentation. Explain the investmentHedge Fund Marketing Pro 43
or risk management tools.
2.Folder. Many managers use a folder of marketing materials while meet-
portfolio manager. It is wise to always include some additional readingin the folder as well. Provide two to three white papers written by ex-
perts outside of the ﬁrm that speak to the trends related to the assets
that your ﬁrm invests in or strategies your ﬁrm employs.
3.Speaking and writing. Speaking at wealth management conferences and
HNW-related events can be highly effective. The easily overlooked as-
pect here is audience: Are there more competitors or potential investors
at the events you speak at?
4.Wealth management and ﬁnancial planners. Some of the most ignored
sources of capital for hedge fund managers are small to medium-size
wealth management ﬁrms and ﬁnancial planning groups that serve
HNW professionals from time to time but don’t manage $1 billion-plusin total assets. Many of these groups work as part of a broker-dealer
each week. These relationships take a long time to build into effective
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
HedgeFundTraining.com/Educational
FORGET ABOUT CONTACTING MORE INVESTORS
your business goals. Many of the hedge fund managers I speak to want to44 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on called “What Is a Family Ofﬁce?” please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Family-
Ofﬁce
Most hedge funds do not take the time to write down all of their current
business problems or symptoms and ask four “why” questions to identify
the root constraint in their business model. A good tool that I have seen usedby half a dozen management consulting gurus is the “Four Why Process.”
root cause of the problem. Here’s an example of how the process is used:
/squaresolidInitial problem/symptom : We don’t manage $100 million in assets
yet. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : We are not raising capital
from wealth management ﬁrms as you had hoped. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : Our marketing materials have
not been brought up to speed with the competition’s—they are light andour investment process is poorly described. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : We know that you should
one. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer : We do not have the proﬁts available to hire a full-time
related advisory board.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 45
The point of this exercise is to identify what the bottleneck is that is
long-term. If 19 links can carry the weight of a $300 million fund but one
and may never reach or only very slowly grow into a $300 million fund. The
biggest return for your investment of time and money will be to focus on
money or energy.
This is a unique marketing technique because it is a reminder that the
smartest thing you could do for your marketing and sales campaign may have
nothing to do with picking up a phone or buying a database of investors.
tips for improving your ability to attract investors:
1.Use the “Four Why Tool” to drill down deeper into the top ﬁve prob-
lems that you see your fund facing right now. Oftentimes three to ﬁve
problems will be symptoms of a single root cause which can be directly
addressed.
tle with two-word surface answers. Try to identify what three to ﬁveaction steps your fund could take this quarter to improve how you are
positioned and address the number one limiting factor in your business.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video called “What Is Holding Your Hedge FundBack?” please type this URL into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Holding
E-MAIL MARKETING BEST PRACTICES
I worked as a risk consultant and capital raiser for seven years before starting
slowly picked up some tips for capital raising since then. Our business is so
potential clients. Here are the e-mail marketing strategies we have picked up
the hard way over the past few years.
Most CEOs don’t invest their time or put much importance on man-
aging e-mail communications. If you invest your time in increasing your
effectiveness at e-mail marketing you will have an edge over others.
E-Mail Marketing Best Practices
1.Understanding importance of copy . What is the difference between a
$1 bill and a $100 bill? The message on the paper. The message on your
and overlooked by business and investment professionals of all types.One of the best tips I can provide for e-mail marketing would be simply
not to overlook the power of a carefully constructed e-mail marketing
campaign or well-written piece of communication.
2.Use the professional’s ﬁrst name in the subject of e-mails to them .
Marketing Sherpa 2008 study showed this practice increased open rates
by 30 percent; using both the ﬁrst and last name increased open ratesby 22 percent.
3.Focus on the headline . The most important part of any piece of copy
the person’s ﬁrst name. Focus on ﬁtting a beneﬁt and then the chain re-
action of that beneﬁt into the headline if possible: “Double Your CapitalRaising Resources to Cultivate More Investors Each Day.” We have
found that putting the beneﬁt after your ﬁrm name is most effective.
Just be careful not to promise beneﬁts that are at odds with your com-
pliance department or the core of what you are really offering.
4.Focus on the start . Hook the reader in the ﬁrst paragraph. Make sure
the ﬁrst paragraph is no longer than two sentences and provides a very
concise summary as to what will be discussed in the following message.
Psychological studies consistently show that professionals are almost
twice as likely to listen more closely and take action on informationrelated to a fear or some negative result than on some potential beneﬁt
or positive outcome. This does not mean you should scare clients into
mentions the positive results as well as the negative consequences of not
taking action. The recent use of e-mail browsers that let you preview theﬁrst 50 to 150 words of e-mail messages makes the start of your e-mail
even more important.
5.Use professional e-mail distribution services . Use a professional e-mail
distribution service such as AWeber. This costs $10/month or less to
start using. By using this service your e-mails will be delivered more
an unsubscribe link at the bottom of each e-mail you send.
6.Automate relationship development . Use automated follow-up e-mails.
Write a series of 20 educational e-mails covering industry white pa-
permission to opt into an e-mail list which will automatically send themthese professional papers once a month for the next 20 months. If you
incorporate a story of some type. How was this product created? How
did your career and experience evolve and bring you to this point where
you have gained this knowledge? If you read the early part of this chapter
you will see that I have a short story about my own experience withe-mail marketing which led me to write this chapter. This helps create a
frame of reference for the reader and can be helpful in many cases.
8.Include a picture and signature . End your communication with a picture
of the professional on the team who is held out as the communicator or
leader. Make sure that a real scanned signature and professional picture
are included to help readers connect with your team.
millions of dollars in capital as well. Through these two sources of experiencewe see many of the same fund marketing mistakes made over and over again.
of your competitors in the marketplace.
Top 10 Fund Marketing Mistakes
1.You have a three-month capital raising goal. This is unrealistic and the
sales cycle. Don’t try to cram everything into a one- to three-month
capital raise.
2.You’re counting on simply building a track record and then hoping to
outsource all marketing to a great third-party marketing ﬁrm down the
road. This puts all of your eggs into the third-party marketing basket.Third-party marketers have hundreds of potential clients approaching
them each year. It is risky to assume one will not only take you on as a
client but actually raise a sustainable level of capital for you.
sitioning in the marketplace. Many times I see fund managers who want
4.Not dedicating resources to capital raising is the most obvious mistake
then wonder why they have not raised more capital. Performance does
relationship management (IRM) system in place to track the results of
your investment in investor relationships.
5.You speak at conferences full of your closest competitors instead of your
highest-value potential investors.
6.You underestimate the value of a ﬁrst-name-basis relationship with your
but relationships are at the core of everything that gets done. Like Jeffrey
7.Another mistake I see in the hedge fund space is a lack of capital-raising
members and then constantly improved each quarter.
9.You write off PR. Most managers shy away from or completely ignore
public relations as an avenue for helping create interest and positioning
for experts on their team. Many funds have now successfully employed
the media to spread messages about their fund.
10. A mistake that I see more than 90 percent of funds doing today is using
not having one at all.
COPY WRITING
or idea.
Copy writing is the most undervalued and overlooked tool that a
marketer or sales professional can develop. Many professionals value cold-
copy writing skills are the most valuable.
Top Five Reasons Copy Writing for Capital Raising Is Important
to others and never being noticed.
95 percent of decisions are based on what’s always been done or what
sounds good instead of A/B testing results to ﬁnd what is effective.
3.Every investment fund markets itself using e-mails and investor letters.
Without copy writing skills you may not only be failing to connect withyour audience but you could actually be turning them off and pushing
clients away.
4.Investment funds of all types are started by successful traders and port-
folio managers; very few are started only by marketers. Due to this
niche marketing practices such as copy writing or see them as something
beneath them.
5.Ninety-nine percent of your competitors are not using copy writing best
practices.50 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of copy writing for capi-
CASE PROFILE
Fund name Tassini Capital Management
Strategy Long/short
Track record 4 years and 8 months
AUM $39.2 million
to approach potential investors. Over a period of four years their fund grew
this breakdown in assets under management.
Family & Friends
HNW Individuals
Wealth Management
Firms$3.1
$14.2 $22.2 AUM in Millions
conferences or networking events in the industry.
Tassini Capital Management has recently hired a proven third-party
marketing team to help them raise capital from new investors. A third-
party marketer is a professional who independently raises capital for fund
Tassini Capital Management to raise a total of $210 million and bring total
AUM up to $250 million in three years.
followed while raising capital. The ﬁrst change made was to the marketing
pitch book in the industry. The advice the third-party marketing ﬁrm gave to
Tassini Capital Management regarding the pitch book included these tips:
Most funds talk about diversiﬁcation and a unique investment process
or team without much meat or real unique advantage presented.
/squaresolidThere should be three main areas of focus in the PowerPoint presen-
controls.
/squaresolidWork with the highest-quality service providers possible so that the funddoes not get scrutinized more than it already will in the normal course
of due diligence.
/squaresolidUse prime brokerage and fund administration business partners to
improve your marketing materials. These two service providers often
provide reporting and risk management aspects which beef up the insti-tutional feel of the organization.
/squaresolidDo not ever let the marketing presentation be longer than 30 pages. Itis challenging enough to get the attention of an investor long enough tothoroughly review a one-page marketing piece on your ﬁrm.
/squaresolidPurchase premium graphics for $2 at iStockphoto.com; develop profes-sional logos for your fund at Design99.com.52 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
/squaresolidUpdate the PowerPoint presentation quarterly with current performance
numbers that have been veriﬁed by the administrator or auditor.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Investor relationship management (IRM) systems were the next thing
few months for the Tassini Capital Management staff to ﬁgure out how to
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on investor relationship management (IRM) pleasetype this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
Investor-Relationship-Management
Investor databases are something that Tassini Capital Management had
never used in the past. Through InvestorDatabases.com and with help from
tential investors and put together a strategic plan for approaching 200 ofthem at any given time.
The method by which Tassini Capital Management was raising capital
third-party marketing ﬁrm consulted Chris and Brian Tassini and found thatthey were both unwilling to part with equity ownership in the managementHedge Fund Marketing Pro 53
company of the fund in exchange for capital. They also reviewed past notes
and conﬁrmed that all efforts to work through institutional investment con-sultants had been stalled due to sub–$100 million AUM levels. The result
was a much more focused method of systematically approaching a mix of
20 percent high net worth individuals. While institutional investment con-
from the consultants.
Despite having hired an experienced third-party marketing ﬁrm for as-
two main challenges while developing relationships with investors. The
ﬁrst challenge was catching the attention of a potential investor. With so
stand out from the crowd. Convincing a potential investor to engage in a40-minute due diligence call was often in and of itself relatively signiﬁcant.
The second challenge the team faced was the noninstitutional feeling that
potential investors got while looking at their sub–$40 million portfolio andteam of four professionals. The business looked unsteady and unproven to
larger institutional ﬁrms that typically had expectations of $80 to $150 mil-
lion as a very minimum needed before allocations are made.
Over two years of trial and error and receiving advice from other
several ways to meet these challenges. Three changes included:
1.Implementing an institutional-quality multiple-modality marketing ap-
ferent role in this marketing approach which supplemented the work
completed by the third-party marketer.
2.Developing prewritten and scripted responses to questions regarding the
and investment research processes. This attention to these speciﬁc areas
of operations led to consistent improvements in how they are carried
out. Many of these changes were suggested by free-to-access institutionalinvestment consultants who had been called upon for feedback.
3.Constructing a sense of authority status around the ﬁrm through its
presence in the market. The team members matched this awareness inthe industry with improved branding and marketing materials and tried
to leverage this to meet in person with as many potential investors as
possible. Meeting investors face-to-face allowed them to get past thegatekeeper at many wealth management and family ofﬁce ﬁrms.54 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Systematic
MARKETING FOR A LONDON-BASED HEDGE FUND
raises capital for a London-based boutique hedge fund manager. Here he
shares some lessons and tips on what he has been doing to raise assets for
his fund.
Richard Wilson: What tips could you provide to hedge fund capital raisers
on developing investor relationships?
with the right person at the ﬁrm.
Richard Wilson: That is good advice. The rule of thumb that I used while
With lower-priority prospects I would try to keep in touch twice a monthin some way. Do you use a CRM system of some type to manage investor
prospects?
Stephen Abrahams: We do not right now but I think they are a good idea.
your sales pipeline? Do you rate investor prospects to keep them in priorityfollow-up order?
Stephen Abrahams: I use an Excel sheet and contact cards along with
Outlook tasks and calendar synched to my iPhone.
Richard Wilson: How many investors is your hedge fund approaching or
investors?Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 55
as I prefer to research and target more likely prospects rather than use ashotgun approach to cultivating new investors.
business right along the way.
includes?
Pratik Sharma: I’ve launched two funds in the past four years. One is a
and do all the marketing and client relations work. I’m not a portfolio
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you use to market
your fund to new potential investors? Anything really unique?
Pratik Sharma: It’s pretty standard. We use a standard pitch book/fact sheet.
We are in the process of creating a more dynamic web site that integrates
Richard Wilson: Do you use a CRM system? How do you track important
investor relationships or potential investor contact details?
and to keep track of important developments over the long term.
Richard Wilson: That’s great. I have used Salesforce as well—it is a tool
raise capital even if it does take some extra time to store everything in
the system up front. Does your ﬁrm build organic investor databases orpurchase investor databases from others?
Pratik Sharma: We build our databases organically over time. Our web site
is designed to drive inbound interest and to keep that interest.
Richard Wilson: Some investor databases are not organized for capital rais-
ing and can be a relative waste of time. How long is your typical investor
sales cycle? Eight months? Twelve months? Eighteen months?56 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Pratik Sharma: We are focused on high net worth individuals and family
ofﬁces. When we raise capital from high net worth individuals our salescycle is two to three months.
Richard Wilson: What is the most valuable lesson you have learned while
raising capital over the past few years?
Pratik Sharma: You must have an easy-to-explain and compelling unique
selling proposition.
investors and raise more capital?
Pratik Sharma: We have found that white papers and webinars are the
most useful tools. They serve as a source of knowledge and insight for
your investors and help to grow the existing relationship. These toolsbuild credibility and demonstrate value even before a formal relationships
starts.
uses educational materials such as our free e-book on hedge funds for this
and then when they have a capital-raising or training-related need we can
be ready for them when they need us. I think that your fund is ahead of
90 percent of the hedge funds I speak to in realizing that if they invest
over through greater total and more loyal investors.
What are your top ﬁve tips to hedge fund managers who have less than
$100 million in assets under management but would like to improve the
institutional quality of their fund?
Pratik Sharma: I would suggest investing in your web site. Try to get feedback
from trusted contacts. Have a real USP that isn’t just ﬂuff—then you will
attract more investors than others in the industry.
hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institutionalizing
a hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
Pratik Sharma: Risk management istrading. It is the way one really generates
controls are something that will be a must-have in ﬁve years instead of a
Now that your hedge fund has grown a bit and has been around for a
few years what do you wish you had known when you ﬁrst started yourhedge fund? What should every new hedge fund start-up know that you
wish someone had told you?
Pratik Sharma: This business is the best in the world. It is still all about doing
the best for your customers. The arrogance and nonalignment of interests
in hedge funds has been atrocious over the last several years. Investors
say it.
Richard Wilson: Great to hear that from a marketer. What three tips or
pieces of valuable advice could you lend to emerging hedge fund managers
or new hedge fund start-ups? What valuable lessons have you learned
in similar situations could learn from?
Pratik Sharma: Get good service providers. Size is not necessarily better.
Some good administrators focus on early stage managers. They can be a
tremendous help.
Richard Wilson: I agree. While sometimes the brand or reputation of the
large service providers leave small hedge fund clients behind in terms of
service.
How long did it take you to launch your fund? About how much did
about this process?
months. Regulatory approvals were the most time-consuming part.
Onshore U.S. Limited Partnership (LP) took 30 days. The most difﬁ-cult part is that the manager has to manage the various entities involved.
result in delays and increased expense.
Richard Wilson: Can you share a few mistakes or setbacks you encountered
that were painful and didn’t have to be experienced?
Pratik Sharma: Don’t have a bad or nondescript USP. You will get laughed
out of some ofﬁces.
Richard Wilson: Deﬁnitely worth repeating that point—I agree. What are
the top three resources or tools that you use to run your hedge fund that
are worth more than anything else? What are the most valuable resources
that you could recommend to others?
Pratik Sharma: Salesforce.com and ConstantContact.com are probably two
of the most useful tools.58 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: What is the critical issue that determines whether you work
from others? Branding? Experience?
Pratik Sharma: It is a bit hard to describe. The best way I can articulate
extensions of your organization. You want to make sure that you feelcomfortable having them interact with your clients. Your clients will call
them.
Richard Wilson: Exactly. I think that in some businesses you may use a
What is the most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-
month operations? How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What
tools have you found that help you manage this?
The markets are volatile and you can’t let market volatility and resulting
mood swings get you off track. The way to do it is to set ﬁrm schedules
done on a drive-by basis. You must deliver value in every interaction to
truly differentiate yourself. Just because you’re ready to take the capitaldoesn’t mean that your potential client is ready to make the allocation.
Richard Wilson: Great advice there. I believe that what you just said there
will be worth more than 10 times the cost of this book to anyone who
is looking to raise more capital for their fund. Over 90 percent of the
complete their marketing for them. This is because they barely have time
to do marketing and they are not marketers at heart. What happens isthe portfolio manager or trader puts in three to ﬁve hours a week toward
That is how things ﬁnally get done in the majority of cases I have seen.
Thanks for sharing that bit.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 59
Do you have any other pieces of advice related to operational hedge
fund best practices that you could share with other managers in theindustry?
Pratik Sharma: This business is allabout raising capital. That is not to say
hedge fund from a person trading in his gym shorts is the ability to raise
capital. Invest your time and money accordingly.
The ﬁnal interview related to fund operations and institutionalization is
fund professional whom I also interviewed for Chapter 2.
Richard Wilson: What have you learned that has enabled your ﬁrm to raise
capital to this point where you are managing a healthy stable level of
assets?
with Harvard graduation.
Richard Wilson: I agree that pedigree is very important to investors regard-
manding $80 million to $100 million or more in single strategies managed
by fund managers. Is that what you have found as well?
Hendrik Klein: The fund volume should be above $50 million USD mini-
every lead in 24 hours.
institutional-quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smaller
investors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?
Any lessons learned here?
Richard Wilson: How long is your typical investor sales cycle? Eight months?
Twelve months? Eighteen months?
raising capital over the past few years?
Hendrik Klein: Follow up in 24 hours. Keep it simple.60 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: What do you see as your main challenge in raising new
capital for your hedge fund?
Hendrik Klein: Explaining our compelling strategy in a way so that investors
feel comfortable to invest. Getting over the $50 million fund size with
every fund that we offer.
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you use to market
your fund to new potential investors? Anything really unique?
articles in magazines.
Richard Wilson: Do you use a CRM system? How do you track important
investor relationships or potential investor contact details?
2010.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the components of a hedge fund market-
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Tassini Capital Management was making several mistakes that emerging
hedge funds often make. These mistakes included:
/squaresolidNot strategically focusing on certain types of investors.
/squaresolidNot developing a system to track investor pipeline development.
/squaresolidNot developing or communicating an institutional-quality fund businesswhile speaking with investor ﬁrms.
/squaresolidUpdating marketing materials.
/squaresolidObtaining investor databases.
/squaresolidFocusing their investor prospects.
/squaresolidCommunicating a clear competitive advantage.
/squaresolidEmploying a multiple-modality marketing and sales approach.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 61
This chapter covers many additional practical capital-raising best prac-
taken from this chapter:
/squaresolidDevelop a list of 10 to 15 publications you wish your hedge fund would
be featured in and approach them one by one.
shortcut to raising lots of capital for a hedge fund.
management and ﬁnancial planner markets.
/squaresolidUse the “Four Why Tool” instead of constantly seeking new investors
or larger investor databases.
/squaresolidThe difference between a $1 bill and $100 bill is the message on the
paper. Don’t underestimate the power of strong sales writing.
/squaresolidSales cycles for hedge fund investors may range from two to threemonths for high net worth investors to eight or more months for insti-tutional investors.
ignored.
/squaresolidUse stories and personalized signatures and pictures in your marketing
materials.
sales team member.
Free Resource : Learn more about hedge fund marketing at
ThirdPartyMarketing.com.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.What percent of institutional investors will not invest unless they
understand the investment being made?a.55
b.44
c.78
d.8862 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
a.10 to 15
b.20 to 30
c.15 to 25
d.70 to 80
3.True or false: Somewhere around 50 percent of your competitors are
probably ignoring copy writing best practices.
.
a.Tax assistance.
b.No risk.
c.Advice.
5.True or false: Large service providers are always better as they provide
more stable services and a more experienced team of professionals.
6.True or false: The “Four Why Tool” helps determine the real root
cause of a problem so you can directly solve that instead of focusing on
symptoms of a core issue your hedge fund is facing.
7.True or false: Multi-modality marketing material sets means having your
marketing materials translated into at least two different languages each
quarter.
8.The four main focuses of your PowerPoint presentation should be:
9.Do not ever let your PowerPoint presentation reach more than
pages in length.
a.10
b.20
c.30
d.60
munications are the:
a.Conclusions.
b.Personalized style.
c.Headlines and introductions.
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 4
The Shooting Star
The skills that get you out of Egypt are not the same skills that will
bring you to the promised land.
—Joe Polish
Why important : Fast-growing “shooting star” hedge funds have dif-
giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds. The advice in this chapter is important be-
networking events.
18 LESSONS FROM SHOOTING STAR HEDGE FUNDS
Fast growing hedge funds are unlike most large and emerging hedge funds.
unlike more than 90 percent of the industry. Here are 18 lessons that can
be taken away from some of the fast-growing hedge funds we have worked
with:
1.They take transparency seriously and work to be proactively verytransparent—more so than their competition. They take transparencyinto consideration from the investor’s point of view.
63The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 64 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.They approach multiple investment channels but mostly ignore those
3.They are always developing relationships and they have dedicated in-
ternal and some external professionals always selling on their behalf.
4.They not only seek pedigree on their team but they are always building
through speaking and writing.
5.They document their operations and make decisions based on what
is best long-term for the organization rather than what is cheaper to
industry.
6.They have risk management and trading plans which are closely fol-
lowed. This helps them improve their actual trading results and provides
conﬁdence to investors since their historical trading actually matches upagainst the decision-making rules of their plans.
and these reports are sent at least to board members if not also to
investors.
these are sometimes the investments that pay off the soonest because
investors recognize the type of long-term investment being made.
10. They are experts at completing due diligence processes with institutional
They have professionals who are trained for phone-based pitches and
11. Their marketing materials are just as good as those of the $1 billion
12. They have seen the light that investing in the right areas does produce re-
than even small hedge funds on a tight budget.
13. They invest in training for their employees and board members with
whom they grow longer-term relationships than many emerging hedge
fund managers might.The Shooting Star 65
14. They are not only aware of the competition but they are watch-
quickly integrate as part of the team. They actually have an HR depart-ment or at least one person who is head of talent development and
gent answer instead of the generic “We may add an analyst within the
next three quarters.”
make it easy to verify everything.
potential employees than some retail investors spend on investing in
small emerging managed hedge funds.
18. They realize their success is never going to be built on one software
ability.
ACCOUNTING AND COMPLIANCE
INTERNATIONAL (ACI)
This chapter’s ﬁrst interview is with Rick Nummi of ACI. Rick is a former se-
nior attorney with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) with
SEC) trade conferences and presentations. Rick is also an experienced ex-
ecutive with a strong track record of helping registered representatives and
broker-dealers succeed in a highly regulated industry.
sharing some knowledge about what fast-growing hedge funds are doing
here today with us.66 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Rick Nummi: My pleasure.
Richard Wilson: The focus of this chapter is a look into what fast-growing
hedge fund managers who are growing assets quickly are doing. What do
asset size even more? Do you have any unique insights that may not be
mentioned anywhere else in this book related to these questions?
Rick Nummi: One of the things that we have seen is the utilization of the
required annual review and the utilization of compliance reviews andsign-offs. Many times now we bind our annual review with our pedigree
and background and provide it to their clients.
Richard Wilson: That is interesting; I have never heard of that happening
before in the industry. How is this different from what your ﬁrm has
experienced in the past while working with these same hedge fund clients?
Rick Nummi: Typically managers get these reports and sign-offs and hide
them under their desk.
Richard Wilson: What has led to this drastic change?Rick Nummi: Now some of these fast-growing managers are operating on
ership salesman saying the car checks out and looks like it is ready to
sell. These hedge fund managers would now like to show a signed-off
document packet to potential investors.
Richard Wilson: Exactly what types of hedge funds are asking for this extra
step—$1 billion-plus hedge funds? Hedge fund start-ups?
Rick Nummi: The primary differentiator here is that these are hedge fund
managers who understand that you can be proactive with your operations
and compliance and raise more capital by assuming that the general publicand your investors do not trust anyone. The common thread that I ﬁnd
is that these fund managers are the ones who are raising the new capital.
investors now really want from them.
Richard Wilson: Some fund managers I speak to shy away from institution-
alization type discussions because they are already operating on a tight
budget. Does this type of reporting include any extra costs?
extra.
Richard Wilson: What happens if in your written report something is ac-
are reported early so that they can be rectiﬁed before the report comesThe Shooting Star 67
been addressed and handled.
Richard Wilson: This seems to be in line with the whole trend of institu-
tionalizing your hedge fund regardless of how large it is. Do you see the
institutionalization trend from your perspective?
Advisor Act itself requires self-compliance. The difference between non-
another level of sophistication and third-party veriﬁcation.
Richard Wilson: Have you actually seen this help increase assets under
management (AUM) for hedge fund managers?
Rick Nummi: Some funds that take these steps have done great during the
recent economic and hedge fund downturn.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other tips related to this proactive ap-
proach to becoming more transparent and then raising more capital be-cause of it?
Rick Nummi: Yes. I often look at the track records and look at the hedge
also shows evidence that you have not taken it seriously.
Richard Wilson: Great feedback.
Rick Nummi: What is most interesting about this is that many hedge fund
document saying that this is taken care of and veriﬁed by a third party.”
This means that the cost of the proactive approach is almost exactly the
level of documentation but who may still ﬁnd comfort in it. It may be one
of three things which really set your fund apart.
compliance reports. Lack of pedigree in the reports was an industry stan-
judging the fund’s pedigree directly and indirectly through their service
providers.68 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of pedigree and a strong team for
Richard Wilson: I agree a hundred percent. I think the long-term difference
that steps like this can make could make or break a business in this
competitive industry.
for the SEC—what should we be taking seriously? What else could we be
doing?”
Richard Wilson: Do you see any other trends in the actions of fast-growing
or large hedge fund managers? These are often the most secretive.
Rick Nummi: We also do due diligence for two of the top ﬁve hedge funds
in the United States. One of the interesting things that occurs when those
will take nothing at face value these days. They want everything complete
and every detail checked at every single turn.
Richard Wilson: What else have you seen happening to fast-growing hedge
funds lately in the industry?
Richard Wilson: That must be a relatively expensive experiment or risk
management check.
Rick Nummi: They typically don’t care if there are withdrawal penalties that
add up to 5 to 10 percent of assets. They just want to know that it can be
fund do this each year. When this is done they are really testing whether
the fund can execute what it promises. What is interesting is that our ﬁrmand many ﬁrms like ours can validate this with an independent report for
hedge fund manager.The Shooting Star 69
to our original point. The hedge fund managers who realize the public’smind-set are the ones who continue to grow at an astronomical rate. If
understand the individual investor and what keeps them up at night you
are sunk. Nobody is above scrutiny anymore. It doesn’t matter how many
what holds small and emerging hedge fund managers back from becoming
reports and checks in place and other small funds that have historically
been ignored do. I think this may be an area of real opportunity for those
funds looking to pass the $100 million or $250 million threshold and startworking with more institutional ﬁrms.
Rick Nummi: I think you are correct in that assessment. In every challenge
there is an opportunity.
Richard Wilson: That leads to a question that many hedge fund managers
may be asking themselves when it comes to service provider partnerships.
How do they know who they should hire in this space?
Rick Nummi: We have a tool on our web site which helps fund managers
select compliance and regulation experts to work with. Here is an ex-
cerpt from this resource—16 questions that managers can use when theyinterview prospective service providers:
1.Was your ﬁnancial regulatory experience ...in my type of ﬁrm? Many
compliance consultants attempt to dazzle you with their former reg-
ence whatsoever. Make sure your prospective consultant has relevant
experience in your type of ﬁrm.
former examiner doesn’t give a big-picture view like more senior levels
of regulatory management. Do not hire a ﬁrm without checking forthe level of regulatory management expertise.
3.How long ago were you a ﬁnancial regulator? Many consulting
ﬁrms utilize long retired former regulators. The world has changed70 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
considerably in the past year (just think of the changes over the past 5 to
10 years). Make sure your consultant has recent regulatory experience.
4.When was the last conference you spoke at (that wasn’t hosted by
your ﬁrm)? Many consultants tout their public speaking engagements
as proof of competence. Make sure they let you know if the conference
they spoke at was hosted by their own ﬁrm. Would you rather have an
expert impartial consultant or someone trying to sell you a vacation?
5.When did you get your law degree? With the recent wave of regulatory
shouldn’t he have the professional qualiﬁcations to explain the nuancesof the law? Why wouldn’t you want a consultant who is also a qualiﬁed
lawyer and/or a certiﬁed public accountant (CPA)?
6.How big was the ﬁrm where you were chief compliance ofﬁcer (CCO)?
held senior positions at ﬁnancial ﬁrms. Wouldn’t it be nice to havesomeone who has walked in your shoes and understands your issues?
7.What certiﬁcations do you hold as an auditor or examiner? Your con-
sulting ﬁrm should be required to have staff that is just as qualiﬁed asyou are. Being an auditor or an examiner requires specialized training.
Ask them what professional designations they hold that qualify them
to do the work you require.
8.How many active ﬁnancial industry licenses does your staff hold? Your
them what they are and when they got them.
9.How much ﬁnance or accounting experience do you have? A consul-
tant should be appropriately experienced in his/her ﬁeld. Ask them
is meaningless if the company was bought or sold and/or key person-
nel have left. The better question is: “How much experience do you
have?”
10. What publications have quoted you on compliance topics? Your con-
sultant should be just as comfortable being quoted in the Washington
Post or on CNBC as discussing the same issue with you. Most major
media personnel understand the concept of credibility and why it isabsolutely necessary before quoting someone. Ask your prospective
consultant for their quotes. Most are justiﬁably proud of their appear-
ﬁrm is charged by law with crafting and editing procedures manuals.
Every regulatory examiner can spot a canned boilerplate manual.
have consultants who are fully versed in only one area of the ﬁnancial
and licensed across all relevant areas? Only through broad experience
can a consultant assist you with ﬁtting the disparate pieces together.Don’t settle for less.
13. At how many legal proceedings have you testiﬁed as an expert witness?
The legal system understands qualiﬁcations even better than you do.You must be certiﬁed as an expert in your ﬁeld prior to the forum
accepting your testimony. A good consultant will have testiﬁed (and
been certiﬁed) many times. Ask them about the last time they testiﬁed.
14. Precisely how many of each of these have you personally examined:
get the consultant’s scorecard. It is how consultants rate each other. It
is also how you evaluate the depth of experience of your prospective
consultant. An answer of 3-1-0-0 is not very comforting.
you have? Many consulting ﬁrms advertise a large number of clients.
more relevant question is “How many paid you last year?” You are
required to carefully evaluate advertising. Choosing a consulting ﬁrm
requires the same diligence to avoid exaggerated claims.
16. Are you the consultant that will be assisting me? Many ﬁrms will
which translates to “We sold you X and we are giving you Y.” The
term commitment.
Richard Wilson: Great questions to ask. Many of these questions could be
rephrased to help fund managers hire other types of service providers and
ELP CAPITAL
The next interview in this section on shooting star hedge funds is with
to identify and structure investment vehicles creating solid investment op-
Richard Wilson: What should very quickly growing hedge funds of $100 mil-
lion invest their money in as they grow? What is most important?
Tom Powell: I believe there is nothing that dictates a company’s success more
than the quality of the individuals who make up its team. Investing in and
attracting quality employees will continue to pay dividends throughout acompany’s life span.
Richard Wilson: I agree that pedigree and team are very important. In many
on most when deciding whether to get involved. Today’s hedge fund
industry has developed to the point where many managers can increase
to grow a team.
Where do you see hedge funds slowing down their own growth due to
lack of resources or skills? What mistakes do you see being made by very
fast-growing $100 million-plus funds?
Tom Powell: Quality hedge funds are slowing down their growth in order
to strengthen their systems and structures. Doing so enables successful
funds to be highly efﬁcient and helps them to prepare for the future.
Putting priority on systems and structures can keep hedge funds operating
consistently no matter how volatile market conditions may become.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see either shooting star hedge
funds or giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds implementing that almost all
small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Tom Powell: Big hedgers talk equally of both long- and short-term goals
and strategies. Small funds are more centered around their short-termThe Shooting Star 73
strategies and they communicate those targets. Such a short-term focus
think and act on a more global level.
Richard Wilson: This goes hand in hand with what we hear from Rick
set as your investors. I believe that even if most institutional investors
What insights do you have on the operational best practices or issues of
these shooting star hedge funds like your own?
Tom Powell: Investors are now demanding that hedge fund ﬁrms be trans-
parent. These difﬁcult times have investors completing more prudent due
managers have to be compliant and open with their processes. Trans-
to being transparent.
Richard Wilson: I have heard from professionals of every type of hedge fund
regarding the importance of transparency. This is obviously a hot button
right now with investors. I want to acknowledge that while this advice is
its importance is not overlooked.
agers be reinvesting their money to improve their operations?
emphasis on strengthening their systems and structures. This recession has
badly shaken the investment world and now is the time to be building for
(and adapting to) the future. Hedge fund managers must choose to either
build the systems and structures internally or outsource the responsibility.
and take their money elsewhere.
Richard Wilson: Great advice. Systems and structures of high-quality oper-
ations are as important to a fast-growing hedge fund as they are to any
consultants to streamline activities.74 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Within this chapter on fast-growing hedge funds I interviewed experts who
hedge funds are doing that may be different from both emerging hedge fund
managers and giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds. Some key lessons from this
chapter include the following:
/squaresolidSome hedge funds are now asking for the pedigree of the service provider
that it is being completed by experts in the ﬁeld.
/squaresolidRick Nummi suggests that the hedge funds he knows that are quickly
gaining assets are those which realize that at some level “nobody trusts
/squaresolidFast-growing hedge funds are prepared for and very responsive to in-
vestor demands for compliance or risk-reporting documentation.
/squaresolidTalent is what one Nevada hedge fund CEO suggests as the most com-mon element of a fast-growing hedge fund.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.Thomas Powell of ELP Capital believes that while returns and marketing
fail as a business.
a.A high pedigree team
b.A web site
c.Corporate quality real estate
d.Operational efﬁciency
after Madoff most of the large frauds in the industry have been quicklyuncovered.
3.One key difference between fast-growing and successful hedge funds
and those that have not raised much capital is that the fast-growinghedge funds focus more on the
goals and less on the
4.Investors reward those hedge funds with proactively with
respect to capital allocations.a.Aggressive capital-raising strategies.
b.Fast-growing teams.
c.Transparent operations.
5.Rick Nummi suggests that those hedge fund managers who understand
will grow at an astronomical rate compared to others
with similar opportunities.a.The political nature of investments.
b.The mind-sets of investors.
c.The laws preventing certain types of investments.
d.The taxes that affect hedge fund investments.
6.What is referred to as the Madoff Effect within this chapter is the
practice of investors:
a.Demanding quarterly fraud checks.
b.Completely liquidating their assets within the fund.
c.Asking for hedge funds to start using independent administration
ﬁrms.
d.Requiring most hedge funds to have an in-house chief compliance
ofﬁcer.
7.Many hedge funds try to be too
to investor demands when
really they could have an edge and improve their whole business bybeing more
.
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 5
Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru
now and live the rest of your life as a champion.”
—Muhammad Ali
start-ups are stopped in their tracks before they ever begin trading the
portfolio. This chapter provides some hedge fund start-up-related tips as well
as interviews with hedge fund start-ups that have survived and succeeded
they launch their businesses. This is not necessarily the fault of the hedge fund
provided by ﬁrms with a strong vested interest in directing your hard-earned
dollars toward their bank accounts. Through this chapter you will be able
to quickly pick up valuable lessons from those who have started and grown
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Hedge-Fund
77The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 78 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
TOP FIVE TIPS FOR STARTING A HEDGE FUND
I recently completed a consulting engagement with a group of professionals
who wanted my most concise tips on how they should launch and start their
have. Here are some of my pieces of advice to them.
1.Starting a hedge fund is not a get-rich-quick scheme. In 90 percent of the
the hedge fund becomes proﬁtable and stable as a business. I’ve worked
with a client in the past who had been running a fund for seven yearsand still had not raised enough capital to be self-sustaining.
2.Always complete due diligence on your service providers. I know of a
work with.
3.Always be growing relationships. This is not the same as “always be
selling.” Selling can be spotted from ﬁve suits away at a networking
will want to give you feedback on your marketing materials or suggest
an alternative path to raising assets.
4.Focus on risk management and the investment process more than on
but a top-ﬁve sign of a green hedge fund manager is someone who
constantly pushes his extremely high returns found in back-testing orhis ﬁrst four months of operating. Doing so ruins your chance of serious
consideration as it gives off the impression that your fund will reach
for those returns at any cost or risk. Speaking about returns too muchdetracts from conﬁdence in your fund’s investment process and risk
management controls.
5.Invest in yourself. Choose high-quality service providers. Build a team.
50 hours creating a solid PowerPoint presentation/pitch book for your
fund. Don’t show it to a single investor until you have completed ﬁvedrafts of it. Too many times I see hedge fund managers looking to raise
possibly capital into it? Investors look for signs of a manager having
skin in the game in multiple ways.
Most hedge fund start-ups I speak with want referrals to respected ser-
vice providers or advice on attracting seed capital. Almost none have a
business plan for their hedge fund and only a few have PowerPoint presen-tations explaining their investment strategy. If you are a fund manager in
may consider writing both a hedge fund business plan and a comprehen-
sive 15- to 25-page PowerPoint presentation now to make it easier to work
potential investors.
Your hedge fund business plan should include information about the
following:
/squaresolidManagement. What team members are required to run the fund effec-
tively? What is the chain of command? How are decisions made? What
happens if two or three professionals disappear tomorrow? Who would
take over responsibilities and what would happen to your investors’funds? The importance of a well-constructed and well-managed team
cannot be overstated.
/squaresolidInvestment process and risk management. Managing risk is what run-
ning a hedge fund is all about. Meet with your prime brokerage ﬁrm’s
and network with other managers to pick up some best practices in this
pointed in the right direction. There is no magic bullet to raising assets
important thing you can focus on.
/squaresolidService providers. Who are you going to use as your prime brokerage
will this evolve as your fund passes the $100 million and $300 mil-lion marks? Will you use multi–prime brokerage services? Capital
introduction teams? Multiple third-party marketers? Your choice of
advice would be to meet and interview at least three service providers
an annoyance to them.
/squaresolidInfrastructure and technology. Meet with other local hedge fund man-
you have to face all of the challenges that accompany that distinction in
addition to those challenges found in managing your portfolio. Manyfunds underestimate the costs of some of the technology needed to op-
erate as they grow beyond the simple $1 to $5 million fund operations.
/squaresolidMarketing . Nothing is traded or managed until the dollars come in.
Anyone who joins your ﬁrm or board will want to know how you
the latter should be 80 percent of your focus if you are managing less
than $100 million. What resources do you or should you have in placeto meet these goals? Third-party marketers? Databases of investors?
An in-house marketing specialist? How much does this cost and when
should these resources be put in place?
HEDGE FUND PITCH BOOK CREATION
Following is a list of tips for professionals looking to create a pitch book
for their hedge fund. My advice to both $90 million and $1 million hedge
funds is that you can never start this process too early. It is an iterative and
constantly evolving project which will never be complete. Here are the top
10 tips for creating hedge fund marketing materials.
before showing it to a single investor.
management controls and how they all interact inside the operations of
your hedge fund.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 81
3.Make your competitive advantage clear and do not rely on canned
phrases such as “positive returns in bull or bear markets.” Anyone whoreviews hedge fund materials for a living will see these by the hour. Your
advantage must be unique.
everything else is built.
5.Do not send any pitch book or marketing material out before speaking
with a qualiﬁed compliance or legal counsel on the team.
of expertise.
7.Work with high-caliber service providers so that you don’t draw extra
extra scrutiny by potential investors and advisers.
other service providers to improve your marketing materials. Profes-
sionals who work in prime brokerage or administration see many typesof marketing materials and can help provide valuable feedback at no
additional cost to your fund.
9.Do not create a PowerPoint presentation that is longer than 30 slides.
There are some institutional money managers who run three similar
but this is the exception. Ninety-ﬁve percent of the people to whom youwill send the PowerPoint presentation will not read more than 15 pages
of the material unless you are walking them through it over the phone
or in person.
layout for the presentation; and use the newest software diagramming
tools to create an institutional-quality presentation. Coming into a meet-
ing with a Word document or 25 pages of bullet points is not very ef-
fective. It is hard enough to catch investors’ attention and bring them tothe table to discuss your fund. You don’t want to lose them due to the
aesthetics of your PowerPoint.
consultant to help his company update their marketing materials and most82 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
recently by joining their advisory board as a business development adviser.
I sat down with Syed to have him share his story of how he started hishedge fund.
Richard Wilson: I speak with lots of professionals who want to start one
but they are not sure if they have the “right” background. How exactly
did you get to start your own hedge fund?
Syed Ali: I found a passion in trading when I saw an ad in a commodities
magazine. I initially started trading in silver futures and lost the entire
then was that everyone had to drive a delivery package car for a period
packages in a timely manner. I went through more hardships and lost allthe money.
Richard Wilson: That must have been a humbling experience.
Syed Ali: This was a very humbling experience but I still had a passion
trade for him. I traded stocks and it took a few more years to develop ourmethodology. This man is one of the most patient and honorable people I
have ever known. We decided to start a hedge fund so we could reap some
of the rewards for all the work that was put into our system.
Richard Wilson: So when did you actually launch your hedge fund?
Syed Ali: We started trading operations in November 2006 as a long/short
equity fund. Leading up to this we hired a law ﬁrm to do our private
we switched brokerage ﬁrms since they had a good platform in raising myassets under management (AUM).
for the year. I was relieved because I don’t think I slept from SeptemberHedge Fund Start-Up Guru 83
I was hoping that things would change toward the latter part of 2009. Let
and that is an essential ingredient to survivability.
Richard Wilson: So what have you learned the hard way by launching your
own hedge fund that you wish someone had told you before you startedyour hedge fund business? What lessons could you share with others now
starting hedge funds?
questions answered in relation to launching a hedge fund since there
were many local professionals who had no idea what a hedge fund was
about. Actually our ﬁrst accountant had to educate himself on hedge fund
accounting. I wished I was connected to a network of informed individuals
who could have walked me through the process. I wished that someonehad informed me that it was going to be a tough road and that just
having good returns was not the only factor in raising funds. Completing
content give valuable information for those starting funds. The CHP helps
the industry language.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
Online
S˜ao Paulo in similar situations as you were. I think that identifying proper
advisers and consultants along the way is critical to keep you on a straightpath; sometimes the wrong service providers can cost you years of time
and possibly even the viability of your business. Do you have any other
advice related to service providers that you learned along the way?84 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
ing a multipartner accounting ﬁrm as a hedge fund administrator to put
investors at ease and possibly guide you to grow organically.
Richard Wilson: What if you had just one piece of advice you wanted
a hedge fund manager to take away from this interview? What
should they keep in mind and remember each day while running theirbusiness?
Syed Ali: Continue to post returns with minimum drawdowns. This is prob-
ably the most important advice I can give anyone. Be patient. Do notrisk too much on one company or event. Anticipate and do not react. If
administration ﬁrm and law ﬁrm that have a good platform for them to
help you grow out your infrastructure. The hardest thing I learned was to
Richard Wilson: That is great advice. I actually hear a mirror of that ad-
vice from investors often. Most investors have little patience for volatilereturns. Wealth management and family ofﬁce investors especially have a
hard time explaining to their end HNW or ultra high net worth (UHNW)
demptions. I think your advice here is in line with my experience that the
stability of solid performance is one of the top three things investors look
for. How long did it take you to launch your hedge fund?
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video called “What Is a Family Ofﬁce?” please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Family-
Ofﬁce
Syed Ali: It took us six months to launch our fund from start to ﬁnish.
We formed our fund around an LLC and the total cost of doing so was
Richard Wilson: I think that is important to share. I often see two extremes
more simple types of fund formation services when they could get the
funds need to spend to retain quality legal advisory services while forming
part of the start-up process tends to be. What was the most difﬁcult partof this formation process for you?
Syed Ali: The most difﬁcult part for me was understanding all of the doc-
documents.
Richard Wilson: What do you see as the main challenge of running a hedge
fund today?
Syed Ali: The main challenge I see is reestablishing trust and being as trans-
that it’s very challenging to get to the next step from being a one-man
or one-woman shop into broadening out the infrastructure into a realbusiness.
Richard Wilson: I agree. I believe that having the right pedigree on your
fraud risk to some degree. These are moving from the nice-to-have box
to the must-have box quickly. What do you believe is helping you raiseassets right now?
emerging hedge fund.
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you currently use?
Syed Ali: We have a one-page marketing PDF that summarizes our strat-
providers. We have poured a lot of time into this one document andit is the key tool we use to market our fund to new investors.
Richard Wilson: Thank you for your time and sharing what you have learned
while growing your hedge fund. I’m sure this will be helpful to many otherswho hope to follow this same path at some point.
Syed Ali: Thank you.86 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
who works for a U.S.-based hedge fund manager; he was also interviewed
in Chapter 2.
Richard Wilson: What would you say are the top four most common or
dangerous trading-related mistakes of hedge fund start-ups or emerging
hedge fund managers?
1.I think all parties are aware on a certain level that the immediate re-
sults are of vital psychological importance. Though the fund may have
focused and disciplined on risk management and speciﬁcally on avoid-
as a manager and your trading style.
2.Don’t be afraid to start small. One doesn’t need to start a fund with
Don’t put the cart in front of the horse; your absolute main goal at
start-up is to deliver the performance that was marketed. Once track
fund.
3.Proprietary trading and hedge fund trading are different animals. At
traders usually emphasize absolute return giving a certain amount of
fund trader may be constrained to a speciﬁc approach of asset class.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 87
These are extremely important distinctions and should not be taken
lightly.
4.Failing to differentiate your fund in a mountain of other similar funds
is another big mistake. You have highlighted this a few times at Hedge-
FundBlogger.com and through your Hedge Fund Group. Networking
and contacts are usually the best methods to attract capital in early
differentiation should be of primary focus in the funds marketing plan.
Richard Wilson: I agree. Paying close attention to drawdowns and positions
that are bleeding is something I hear traders refer to often. I think that
watching your month-to-month performance is more important any other
down to the month-to-month level of scrutiny and curiosity.
Can you suggest four best practices or valuable trading lessons learned
through all of your experience? These lessons could be related to working
trading-related advice that I can provide:
1.Risk management is everything. There are a thousand and one reasons
reasons matter. This was an important lesson in my evolution as a
and it sells; risk management is not. If you read interviews of great
some fancy entry rules. Warren Buffett: “Rule number 1: Never lose
money. Rule number 2: Never forget rule number 1.” George Soros:
“My approach works not by making valid predictions but by allowing
2.Understand behavioral ﬁnance and especially biases about money.
that they exist is the best hedge available. Even quantitative traders can
beneﬁt greatly from understanding behavioral ﬁnance. One such beneﬁt88 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
strategy. Quant trading eliminates one set of biases for a complete set
of new ones.
from experience when it works and when it doesn’t.
very differently from BIDU. This should free up some time to work on
Richard Wilson: What types of risk management tools have you found most
effective while trading?
Nakul Nayyar: I would name three tools as most effective in risk manage-
ment:
1.Options are securities designed for risk management. The interesting
thing about options is the ability to design a risk-to-reward criterionbefore the trade is made. I have met many traders who utilize options
as a leverage tool and not as risk management. Though it is one of the
it is much more difﬁcult to rationalize away our initial ideas on the
trade.
review and monitor positions can be highly beneﬁcial. We are con-
stantly ﬁghting our biases in this game and a fresh pair of eyes andopinions can allow the trader to reanalyze the situation. Oftentimes a
them to regain perspective.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 89
Richard Wilson: How do you see hedge fund trading and the industry chang-
ing over the next few years? Do you see the use of models and black boxtrading fading away or remaining strong in certain parts of the industry?
Or maybe the industry is trading in more international markets than ever
before? What trends are you seeing from your perspective?
Nakul Nayyar: I can name three basic trends:
once was lucrative but now is no longer a viable strategy for a majority
on forecasting over arbitrage.
2.There is also a very clear bifurcation in the hedge fund space based
on liquidity of the strategy. Hedge funds will focus more on exchange-
3.Obviously there is more emphasis on transparency and investors’ access
account structure.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
/squaresolidMost hedge funds need at least three to ﬁve years to raise enough capitalto create a sustainable business.
/squaresolidComplete thorough due diligence on your service providers; have at
least a short two- to three-page request for proposal (RFP) for them to
complete while you are deciding who to work with going forward.
or sales copy writer if you don’t have those skills in-house.
/squaresolidSyed Ali offers advice for emerging hedge fund managers: Watch draw-
record.
/squaresolidNakul Nayyar recommends that emerging hedge fund managers should
understand behavioral ﬁnance.
Free Resource : Learn more about hedge fund start-ups at HedgeFund
StartupGuru.com.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: Nakul Nayyar suggests that you create a detailed trading
plan so that you can take more aggressive positions within the portfolioand have those moves documented on paper within the ﬁrm.
portant than for trades.
4.Within this chapter it is suggested that should be the focus
above all else while marketing a fund.
a.Transparency.
b.Operations.
c.Differentiation.
d.Outsourcing.
5.True or false: One difference between prop traders and hedge fund
managers is that prop traders are allowed large latitudes in terms of
approach of asset class.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 91
6.True or false: Syed Ali believes that putting your fund into as many
hedge fund research databases as possible is a bad idea and can hurt thebrand of your hedge fund for two main reasons.
7.The two main challenges that Syed Ali and many emerging hedge fund
managers face is moving up the learning curve on all of the legal and
industry terms in the industry. The other main challenge is moving from
a
to a .
proper infrastructure in place.
8.Which of the following is notsuggested as a way to both address fraud
risk and lower investor fears of this type of risk:
a.Create an independent board of advisers.
b.Employ trusted service providers and business providers.
d.Have respected ofﬁce space in either New York City or London.
9.True or false: Within this chapter we suggest to forget building relation-
in place—otherwise you will end up wasting your time and resources.
10.It is recommended that you do not show an investor your marketing
documents or information on your fund until it has been reviewed at
least times by your team of service providers.
a.3
b.5
c.10
d.15
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 6
Dedicated to Due Diligence
It is the studying that you do after your school days that really
knows.
—Henry Doherty
professional who helped lead the efforts to create the CHP Designation
Level 2 Program on due diligence.)
overwhelming conﬁdence in the validity of the investments they were select-
Investment Securities had been brought up to the SEC for possible violations
since as early as 1999. The SEC was alerted to possible fraud concerning Sir
Allen Stanford as early as 2002. The credit crunch of 2007 was what ﬁnally
brought these frauds to light.
The possibility of fraud going undetected on such a massive scale has
caused a revolution in how in-depth due diligence will go when investigatinga hedge fund and its manager(s) for potential investors. The days of run-
and-gun investing when investors were chasing the highest returns possible
intend to implement. This is helping bring hedge funds more into the main-
stream and change the public’s opinion of how secretive they have appeared
(HNW) investors looking to invest in the hedge fund arena.
93The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 94 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
manage risk or obtain additional capital.
experts in the due diligence arena and Richard Wilson consisted of a series
of questions to gain a further understanding of their experience in the due
diligence ﬁeld. The questions include personal background questions suchas what is the preferred background for someone who wishes to start a
profession in the due diligence arena concerning hedge funds; and what’s
the best advice you can give to someone starting out in due diligence. We
through a due diligence questionnaire (DDQ) process more efﬁciently.
ing similarities that are consistent across the due diligence domain that must
be highlighted.
WEALTH MANAGEMENT
GCC Family Wealth Management. Scott graduated with a bachelor of sci-
ence degree in mechanical engineering from Virginia Tech in 1991. Scott’s
came a senior consultant with the Investment Consulting Services Group of
also a Rule 144 specialist.
Scott joined the Private Bank at Bank of America in 2003 as a senior
founded to provide objective advice as well as a higher level of customizationand customer service for high net worth clients.
GCC Family Wealth Management was formed as a result of a merger
with Family Ofﬁce Research. It is a multifamily ofﬁce designed to manage the
and foundations. GCC Family Wealth Management is a collaboration of ex-
management.
Scott Freund’s recommendation for someone pursuing a job in the due
arenas. He believes that good due diligence requires a very thorough indi-
and deﬁnitely verify” philosophy into his practice. He also thinks that due
diligence is better performed by a ﬁduciary adviser as opposed to an adviserwho works on a commission basis.
for a single fund. It’s mandatory to have background checks done on allprincipals involved in the fund during this stage. Some telltale signs that
something may be amiss are if a manager is too quick to close or if he says
holders and will encourage you to do so. Scott believes in the importance of
checking on the status of the board of directors of each fund. This includesgetting the telephone numbers of each member and verifying that each one
they are getting compensated in any way for being on the board of directorsfor the said fund.
One of the best standard due diligence questionnaires (DDQs) available
comes from the Investment Management Consultants Association (IMCA).
Scott believes that if fund managers would provide a DDQ (see Appendix B)
ADVISORS LLC
lor of science degree from Cornell University (1996) and a master’s degree96 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
in business administration (2001) from the Stern School of Business at New
Salomon Smith Barney in the Derivatives Capital Markets Group. He then
served as a senior research analyst and Investment Committee member at
the Citco Group.
research for Deutsche Bank’s private wealth management division. At
pany. He joined Cantor to start up and establish a hedge fund investment
Atrato Advisors was founded by Brian in October 2008 to meet the
specializing in hedge fund research and portfolio management advisory ser-
vices that works with direct allocators to hedge funds as an independent
services.
Brian believes that although there are many backgrounds that are ap-
prior experience should have some relevant strengths in the various aspects
all background jobs that Brian ﬁnds complementary to hedge fund due
diligence. He points out that the ability to be versatile across all of these
areas is a positive for someone wishing to do hedge fund due diligence as
a career.
This leads to Brian’s advice for anyone considering hedge fund due
ments to invest or not to invest is also a key aspect of the position. Brian
Brian says that he enjoys the challenge of trying to ﬁnd the one piece or
several pieces of information that are ultimately going to drive his investmentDedicated to Due Diligence 97
to highlight the positives and downplay negatives. Brian looks forward to
going to ﬁnd that crucial and possibly hidden data point.
but on average it takes about three to four months. The biggest lesson Brianhas learned is to share information with peers and competitors. He thinks
it is virtually impossible to know everything about a fund manager or his
who he wants to communicate with. He feels that if sharing information
with a competitor can help protect their client by bringing to their attention
manner.
behavior either in trading record or career progression is a softer way of
trying to ﬁgure out what a portfolio manager is most likely to do when his
also veriﬁes the existence and roles of the speciﬁc board members throughonshore and offshore counsel.
Brian ﬁnds that trustworthy managers always have the most trans-
of honest management. If an investor has good information about a fund’s
Brian doesn’t believe in administering a boilerplate DDQ. He ﬁnds that
using such questionnaires greatly limits the creativity one needs to carefully
manager to predict and carefully massage crafted messages. Most managersproduce a similarly formatted Alternative Investment Management Associa-
tion (AIMA) type questionnaire anyway. The AIMA standard questionnaire
is already the most used tool throughout the industry. More candid answers98 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
are generated throughout the dialogue with a manager when the conversa-
tion is less structured and more free-ﬂowing. A competent and experiencedCFO and COO also help the process ﬂow more smoothly.
providers and internal operational staff is the key to early success. This also
quickly and generally be rewarded in the long run. Brian points out that
fund manager who traded a discretionary global macro strategy. The fundmanager had pedigree from one of the largest multistrategy hedge funds in
to the mid-1990s for proﬁt and loss (P&L) that he managed while employed
this assertion. The portfolio manager became enraged and stormed out of
but the fury by which he ended the meeting (something I had never seen
before nor have I seen again) was enough to paint a picture of a highlyvolatile persona and one whom I didn’t want managing our money.”
diligence. The most notable difference is the use of a standardized DDQ ver-sus the aversion to one. Brian and Scott are both of the opinion that verifying
the validity of the board of directors of each fund is of the utmost impor-
Wilson about his experience in the hedge fund world and his experienceDedicated to Due Diligence 99
and advice concerning hedge fund due diligence. Richard has a background
in capital raising and risk management. He holds a bachelor’s degree in busi-ness administration from Oregon State University and an MBA in marketing
ital for an investment bank and a start-up tech ﬁrm and then went into risk
management consulting and process design advisory work. While he feels
and marketing aspect of raising capital.
Richard moved back into a capital-raising role as a third party marketer
This position allowed him to help roll out new products and raise capital forexisting portfolios. Richard eventually was able to help raise over $225 mil-
lion in this ﬁrst third party marketing role and has helped raise another
$100 million-plus since. While Richard didn’t see as many fund managers
(AUM); there is just not enough time to really look into every manager who
Our interview went on to probe into what Richard thought were some
of the biggest problems in hedge fund due diligence as well as what he
thought was useful advice for this ﬁeld. Poor marketing materials are one ofthe things that stand out right away to Richard as an area that could use
improvement. He believes that many managers with less than $1 billion in
professionals who start hedge funds are experts at their domains of trading
Due diligence calls are another area of improvement for hedge fund
managers to work on. Completing due diligence calls is an art in itself.Richard thinks that most managers underestimate the importance of what
you say and how you say it during these phone calls. Many institutional100 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
investors and almost all institutional consultants now have databases where
they record and maintain records on every manager they speak to across thecompany. If you blow one single phone call with a consultant who advises
their fears about one issue which could have been misinterpreted in the last
phone call you had with them.
Richard’s tips for avoiding pain in this area would be to work on possible
your words can be interpreted are key aspects of being prepared for a phone
size through varying markets or that you are taking a large amount of risk inthe portfolio. Richard warns that everything you say can have two to three
meanings and that you should make sure you control that and clarify the
meaning for yourself or after others have spoken on your team.
Richard believes organization is another area that is often overlooked
by hedge fund managers when it comes to due diligence—having everything
Richard warns not to wait until a family ofﬁce decides not to invest in yourﬁrm because you can’t produce one of these reports. Be highly organized
and efﬁcient when it comes to marketing and you will come off as having
Richard always try to advise funds on building their own internal mar-
keting resources because no third-party marketer will ever care more than
the actual manager about raising capital for his own fund. Richard thinks it is
smart to use third-party marketing services in the appropriate circumstancesbut that it shouldn’t be the resource that a hedge fund bets its business on.
Managers must raise capital on their own as well and move up the learning
curve on what it takes to manage a third-party marketer.
Richard also went on to explain some of the most useful tips he com-
monly sees in hedge fund due diligence. Richard notes that the very best
improved before and after each due diligence phone call that occurs. These
if you take notes on what is said during the call or ask the consultants for
permission to record them for later review.
Questions will be asked that are speciﬁc to each fund’s performance and
after ﬁve years of running the portfolio. These questions must be answered
solution that Richard has found works best is typing up speciﬁc answers in
the speciﬁc fund and personnel. This allows the manager to either read
from the typed responses over the phone or e-mail the consultant the one-
Having a lot of clarity is also key. Richard advises managers to know
the ﬁve points they really want to drive home during the due diligence
process about their speciﬁc fund. How are you positioning your fund and in
what tangible ways is your fund different? Simply saying that your returns
are uncorrelated with the stock market and you can make money in any
market condition is not tangible or unique but heard every hour in the
industry.
Richard has completed due diligence on hundreds of hedge fund man-
agers from the perspective of a marketer but never as an analyst or fund of
an AUM ﬁgure as a ﬁrst-pass cutting tool but then also skips through most
of the other steps needed to allocate funds. This practice is rampant and
fund managers. It slows down the natural process of evolution in the in-dustry and provides the largest of investors with less appealing long-term
returns. The best due diligence Richard has seen is by ﬁrms that take on a
very limited set of clients each year so they can dedicate adequate resourcestoward each fund they analyze. It takes time to look at portfolio returns and
Richard feels that the biggest difference between those who do due diligenceright and those who do it wrong are poor talent and resources compared to
approaches.102 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
DUE DILIGENCE EFFECTS ON HEDGE FUNDS
into what can happen when due diligence is lacking or not up to par. Let’s
examine three infamous examples of hedge funds blowing up and point out
some examples of how good due diligence could have protected investors
from mistake and/or fraud. The examples used here are Long Term Capital
Long Term Capital Mangement
trading at Salomon Brothers. The fund’s trading strategies were basedupon various arbitrage designs combined with high amounts of leverage.
company had amassed just over $1.01 billion in capital.
1
LTCM used mathematical models to ﬁnd ﬁxed-income arbitrage oppor-
tunities in various government bonds. The managers were making successful
trades betting on convergence strategies in these bonds and had amassed an-nualized returns of over 40 percent in their ﬁrst few years. As their success
ﬁrm had equity of $4.72 billion.
This increasing capital base and unheard-of performance put pressure
only they had run out of good ﬁxed-income arbitrage plays. LTCM thenmoved away from the ﬁxed-income arbitrage that had worked so well for it
and interest rate sweeps.
its AUM was $4.72 billion but it had borrowed over $124.5 billion with
approximately $1.25 trillion.
The Russian ﬁnancial crisis that started in August 1998 triggered a
ﬁxed-income arbitrage play and caused huge losses of over $1.5 billion.
a month. This translated to a leverage ratio of over 250 to 1 at the end of
September 1998. The fund was eventually liquidated by 2000.
LTCM teaches us an important fact about hedge fund due diligence:
Know and verify that the hedge fund manager will stay in his designated
tives to ﬁll the void and maintain the momentum that investors had come to
expect out of the fund. Had LTCM stuck with what it had excelled at from
Bayou Hedge Fund Group
Another example of hedge fund due diligence gone bad was the BayouHedge Fund Group. This was a conglomerate of companies and hedge funds
founded by Samuel Israel III in 1996. The group raised $450 million from
investors.
A very simple background check of Mr. Israel would have shown that
he had a National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) membership
but a simple call to the registrar conﬁrms that he was placed on academic
suspension and subsequently left school without receiving a degree. The
does not have an undergraduate degree should have raised a warning ﬂag at
43 years old when it happened and was also found to be carrying marijuana
three indicates a much deeper personality ﬂaw and should have stopped any
investor from placing trust with Mr. Israel.104 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
This is a prime example of where hedge fund due diligence had not
included a thorough manager background check. Mr. Israel’s statementsand actual background showed vast discrepancies. A thorough background
check compared to the statements Mr. Israel provided would have raised
the ﬁrst red ﬂag. Another red ﬂag would have come up due to some of the
manager holds a great amount of responsibility and therefore should have
displayed virtuous traits throughout his personal and professional life priorto becoming a hedge fund manager.
Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities
Madoff founded the ﬁrm Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities LLC
in 1960 with money he earned working as a lifeguard and sprinkler installer.
executing orders over the counter from retail brokers.
Madoff used this function as a way to defer any electronic record of
transactions he supposedly was making for his clients. By trading all of his
and thereby eliminate any paper trail of those trades.
Although this would make only a savvy investor suspicious of Madoff’s
proof of their holdings was the paper statements they received monthly in
the mail.
his fund. He also turned down the opportunity to have managed accounts
investments.
Madoff had actually served as the chairman of the board of directors
had lured more people into his investments.Dedicated to Due Diligence 105
The part of due diligence that is highlighted by the entire Madoff fraud
documentation of the underlying funds held by the fund does not necessarily
give away those strategies. Proper due diligence on Madoff’s fund should
have raised red ﬂags due to the fact that he was in control of every aspect of
2
3
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter provides information on recent hedge fund due diligence trends
ofﬁce and the other at an institutional consulting ﬁrm. Some key lessons fromthis chapter include the following:
vestment arenas. Brian Reich suggests also being an “all around athlete”
in many different disciplines.
/squaresolidGood due diligence takes a very thorough professional who works onthe “trust but verify” basis who takes nothing at face value.
/squaresolidYou can often tell a lot just by how open a hedge fund is to letting
service providers.
/squaresolidDue diligence on a hedge fund can sometimes take more than six months
but often lasts just two to four months.
managing due diligence processes and this leads to problems.
ISBN 1-55786-443-8.
3Ibid.106 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.This chapter stresses that the main lesson to take away from Long Term
Capital Management is that
a.It is important that a hedge fund manager stay within his designated
b.Foreign exchange investing inside of hedge funds can be very risky
when those bets are made using only a single prime brokerage ﬁrm.
c.Even well-respected hedge funds can blow up.
a.Too much transparency.
b.Too much compliance reporting.
c.Eliminating hedge funds from due diligence processes mostly based
on AUM.
d.Eliminating hedge funds from due diligence processes mostly based
on background checks.
3.True or false: In this chapter it is suggested that you take every piece
detailed answers into your PowerPoint presentation so that you come offas 100 percent prepared and well established to all investors.
4.True or false: It is best to remain highly ﬂexible during hedge fund
due diligence calls while presenting your strategy and team—this way
your team can adapt on the ﬂy to whoever on the team feels like taking
the lead in presenting the details of your investment process and risk
management tools to the ﬁrm completing the due diligence.
how important hedge
fund due diligence calls are with potential investors.
a.Underestimate
b.Overestimate
6.True or false: Hedge fund due diligence takes in-depth quantitative and
qualitative analysis skills to ﬁgure out what is missing or is not being
7.Brian Reich has found that managers have the most trans-
parency.
a.Small hedge fund.
b.Large hedge fund.
c.Trustworthy.
d.Fast-growing.
8.Which of the following is not suggested as a way to identify potential
problems that exist within the hedge fund during a due diligence process?Dedicated to Due Diligence 107
a.Evasive behavior.
b.Questionable business structures.
c.Small portfolio management teams.
d.Obscure service provider relationships.
process takes months to be completed.
a.2t o4
b.8t o1 2
c.18 to 24
d.4t o1 2
10. True or false: Hedge fund due diligence professionals always use boiler-
these you will be able to simply use that for all future inquiries.
dHedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 7
Giant Hedge Funds
On the mountains of truth you can never climb in vain: Either you
powers so that you will be able to climb higher tomorrow.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
While most hedge funds are small in size it is typically the largest of hedge
Why important : If you are trying to grow a hedge fund it can help to see
what the hedge funds who are receiving most of the new incoming capitalare doing. In this chapter we provide some clues and a peek behind the
curtain to what the largest of hedge funds are doing different from smaller
fund managers in the industry.
BEST PRACTICES FROM $1 BILLION-PLUS
HEDGE FUNDS
Following is a list of ten best practices that I have seen $1 billion-plus hedge
funds employing that are more often than not missing within small teams of
hedge fund professionals. Large well run hedge funds often have:
proved in many ways every quarter. They focus on Kazien—constant
improvement.
109The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 110 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
consistent quality and improve what is being carried out.
3.International marketing and sales teams which cover institutional in-
vestors and consultants in at least Europe and the United States if not
able to retain the most experienced experts not only as adjunct advisers
to the fund but full-time employees or consultants who provide daily or
weekly insights on upcoming investment opportunities.
5.Human resources strategies . Many small hedge funds do not have any
Larger hedge funds do and must keep their organization moving forward
and growing over the long term.
6.Master DDQs . Every large hedge fund I know of has a very thorough
master due diligence questionnaire that is constantly updated. The larger
the hedge fund the more likely it is that their investors will be asking for
a very thorough DDQ during the due diligence phase.
7.Superior marketing . Larger hedge funds have moved to the top of the
learning curve when it comes to ﬁguring out how to raise capital. They
use multi-modality marketing channels and materials and they have
relationship development processes and goals in place which match up
with the long-term growth goals of the fund. They are also more than
willing to invest in the best graphic designers and sales copy writerswho can provide another edge over those who skimp on their image
and marketing presence.
8.More in-house functions . While large hedge funds still use service
providers and rely upon business partners many of them have large
enough staffs and unique enough processes that some work such as
done in-house instead of being outsourced to service providers such as
administrators or third party marketers.
9.More veriﬁcation points . The largest of hedge funds have been asked
10. Long-term strategies and goals . Most large hedge funds I know of plan
for the next three to ﬁve or ﬁve to seven years strategically in who theyGiant Hedge Funds 111
most smaller hedge funds are very focused on day-to-day or month-to-month operations and most think in terms of one- to three-year plans.
allocations than small ones. They have the infrastructure and mind-set
more in common with an institutional investor.
ANGEL FUND
of Second Angel Fund.
Richard Wilson: What type of hedge fund do you work for?
cally bridge lending funds that provide short-term ﬁnancing secured bycommercial real estate.
Richard Wilson: Can you explain how that strategy relates to a more typical
long/short equity fund?
Richard Zahm: The strategies have all of the attributes that equity funds are
subject to the backlash brought about by unrelated residential mortgages
and the credit crunch.
cluding both small funds and an $800 million fund. What would you say
is the number one difference between your hedge fund operations in the
management?
there’s tighter focus by senior management as to what’s contained in the
portfolio. Personal contact with borrowers and investors is greater and
there’s a good sense of the details of each speciﬁc position. It’s a lot like112 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
being in a small boat: You’re aware of subtle shifts in everything around
you.
You’re also more exposed to changes in conditions than you are in a
larger vessel. A bigger fund provides more opportunity to diversify risk
across a greater number of investments. Performing loans in the fund
it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to maintain lender discipline.
Richard Wilson: How can funds like yours ﬁght against this?Richard Zahm: The differentiator for us has been a combination of discipline
Richard Wilson: What advice would you offer to small to medium-size
hedge fund managers who have yet to bridge the gap between the $5 to
$100 million mark and the $1 billion-plus mark?
Richard Zahm: Focus on the additional requirements that larger institutional
at a smaller size.
Richard Wilson: That’s a great piece of advice. I think many times managers
are hesitant to make large changes to their processes if they feel like it is
going to slow them down or get in the way of how they have operatedsuccessfully in the past. Do you have an example of this?
Richard Zahm: Compliance and due diligence material and documentation
can prove performance are the costs of admission as the fund grows. It’s
about every emerging manager right now who is planning to keep up withfurther regulatory developments.
tional investors than they may be receiving now?Giant Hedge Funds 113
given amount that could represent too large a position in a fund. From
and how there might be a ﬁt.
Richard Wilson: I think that hits on a very common frustration in the indus-
as $100 million. Any other advice in regard to marketing to institutional
investors?
institutional investors often have. They’re under constraints themselves.
Provide information to them in the format they want.
spoil a potential partnership by checking in every three days regardingprogress or status of a potential allocation or due diligence questionnaire
investor is 12 to 16 months or more. You will be sending the wrong signalsand moving away from having a solid relationship with the potential
investor if you are a pest.
What group of institutional investors do you see as having a very strong
in demand in terms of allocations to hedge funds over the next 5 to
10 years?
grow in assets much more quickly than competitors who work in a more
complex or black-box type environment?
managers who have less than $100 million in assets under managementbut would like to improve the institutional quality of their fund?
Richard Zahm: My advice would be to focus in on:
1.Transparency.
2.Prominence in the industry.114 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
3.Innovation.
4.Consistency.
5.Investor communications.
Richard Wilson: Very valuable—this whole book could be on those ﬁve ideas
only and be worth a lot to many fund managers today. We have touched
on transparency in many places in this book; it is more important than
mention. I think that more than 90 percent of hedge funds are started
based on portfolio management and trading expertise and not on capital-raising or marketing abilities. This leads many hedge funds to be very
that many of the skills and practices of the manager may go unnoticed.
Often institutional investors will knock managers off of a short list if their
some mandates for these types of reasons.
related to trading or operations that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position as a
high-quality fund management business? Any lessons or tips to share on
this point?
Richard Zahm: Tight focus on lending discipline. Constantly relate local
market conditions to macro elements. Closely monitor related segments:
local and regional institutional lenders.
do you believe is most important for a hedge fund to focus on improving
when thinking about institutionalizing a hedge fund? Risk management?
Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
institutional-quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smallerinvestors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?
Any lessons learned here?
Richard Zahm: Institutional quality has been less of an issue. Size is the
to cash out all at once.
Richard Wilson: What are the top three resources or tools that you use to
run your hedge fund that are worth more than anything else? What are
the most valuable resources that you could recommend to others?
Richard Wilson: How important do you think service providers are to the
success of your fund? What process have you used to select these service
providers and what lessons have you learned about working with both
large and small service providers that your ﬁrm has worked with? You do
not have to use any names of individual ﬁrms—generic advice is ﬁne.
cillary role in our segment due to the simplicity of our model and the
sufﬁcient.
talked about how important service providers are to their fund. Can you
explain your perspective further?
Richard Zahm: Size of service providers is less important than their famil-
paying for the privilege.
Richard Wilson: That’s a great case study example of the downside of work-
ing with the largest of service providers. I have experienced this same116 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
trouble while working with very large service providers. I think there is
a difference between a service provider with niche knowledge and an ex-perienced team versus a giant of a ﬁrm that hires 100 new professionals
each year. So you would suggest that really examining the team of the
service provider is key?
Richard Zahm: Sorting out the claims of proﬁciency versus actual capability
is key.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other pieces of advice related to opera-
tional hedge fund best practices that you could share with other managers
in the industry?
Richard Zahm: Always keep in mind that you’re a small business. Even if
Richard Wilson: Great advice—at least a third of the questions I get relate
to running a small business as a hedge fund manager. Many times hedge
funds aren’t described or analyzed as small businesses but they are in fact
just that.
What is the most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-
month operations? How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What
tools have you found that help you manage this?
one that’s witnessing a dramatic loss of equity over a short period of time.
Richard Wilson: What speciﬁc changes has that brought to how you operate?
Richard Zahm: Investment models that have stood the test of time have been
put into question and are demanding new approaches and the incorpora-
tion of skills that were earlier separate.
Richard Wilson: Can you give us an example?
have to contend not only with market changes but with the new role
model is being modiﬁed. We’re in the crosshairs of regulators coming
to grips not just with mortgage lending but with banking and investorrelations.
The tools are pretty straightforward. It comes down to obtaining and
Richard Wilson: Thank you for all of this valuable information provided
here today—we appreciate your time invested here.
HEDGE SOLUTIONS
ofﬁce consulting services to small and large hedge funds. Scott has workedwith numerous hedge fund managers over his career and has seen ﬁrsthand
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you see hedge funds
picking up that are somewhat new to the industry as a whole but have
existed in the largest of hedge funds for some time?
Scott Cohen: In light of recent fraud activity in the industry and the desire for
ask questions. Performance statistics and attribution analysis posted on
the web site are shared by managers with their investors on an ongoingbasis.
Richard Wilson: The one piece I picked out there that is not often put into
practice is the routine conference calls with investors. Most hedge funds
and instead handle all communications on an individual basis. I think that
offering such transparency to the team and chief investment ofﬁcer is a
good way to keep the lines of communication open in both directions.
Based on the best practices of $1 billion-plus hedge funds and fast-
be reinvesting their money?
Scott Cohen: Hedge funds should be directing their efforts and resources
toward capturing and reporting information that is meaningful to their
latory requirements of the investment adviser. Middle- and back-ofﬁce118 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
be able to provide added review on the administrator and any reporting
issues can be addressed effectively.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds
implementing that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Scott Cohen: Every hedge fund needs to consider internal controls and reg-
ulatory compliance. Funds smaller than $1 billion don’t always consider
tional investors now expect fund managers to have formal compliance
for smaller funds to achieve a competitive advantage is to implement
stricter compliance mechanisms such as leveraging the use of their currentadministrator or using an outsourced compliance service.
Richard Wilson: Almost every hedge fund manager I know would like to
managers now invest money if they are already growing quickly and
gaining assets rapidly?
Scott Cohen: Hedge fund managers who are experiencing quick growth are
obviously aware of the need to gain better information in order to achieve
back-ofﬁce requirements also expand. Hedge fund managers need to be
certain that internal compliance programs are robust enough to integrate
portfolio risk systems and back-ofﬁce systems must be implemented so asto manage the company’s business risk.
Richard Wilson: Where do you see hedge funds slowing down their own
growth due to lack of resources or skills? What mistakes do you see beingmade by very fast-growing $100 million-plus funds?
Scott Cohen: Very fast-growing $100 million-plus funds experience prob-
lems when they deviate from their principles on the portfolio. As man-agement of the portfolio shifts from one investment strategy to another
enhancement to the original investment strategy yields better results thanabandoning it. Another area of difﬁculty is lack of objectivity and proper
due diligence in the investment made. This could be caused in part by lack
of requisite skills. Sometimes investors will fully redeem from a particular
fund if they perceive that the fund manager is not addressing their needs
from a reporting perspective or not communicating effectively.
Richard Wilson: True. I also believe that a risk just as dangerous as poor per-
formance is coming across as inconsistent over time. If you have changed
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of investment research versus
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Research
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter provides some lessons and direct insights from how large
$1 billion-plus hedge funds are operated. Some key lessons from this chapter
include the following:
while larger funds make more strategic long-term decisions and have a
different focus.
/squaresolidLarger funds are typically able to diversify investments across a larger
areas.
/squaresolidMany large hedge fund managers have learned to keep their diversity
model in place the hard way. It is tempting to run with what seems to
be working instead of diversifying your investments.120 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
things that large hedge funds have in place that most small hedge fundsstruggle with.
fund.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: Scott Cohen states in this chapter that he doesn’t believe
that the “tone at the top” is important any longer as ﬁnancial controlsand compliance processes have taken the front stage within the hedge
fund industry.
2.True or false: A risk just as big as poor performance is appearing and
acting inconsistent over time.
3.Richard Zahm suggests that even when you are managing $800 million
still apply.
a.Business negotiation tactics.
b.Business start-up considerations.
c.Capital-raising best practices.
4.A lesson to take away from large hedge fund operations is that the size
of a hedge fund service provider does not always determine the quality
of service; the most important thing to consider is .
a.How they work with other service providers.
b.How familiar they are with your strategy.
c.How many years they have been in business.
d.How familiar they are already with your team.
5.In this chapter it is suggested that the advantages of building a large
$1 billion fund based on smaller investors include all of the following
except:
a.Loyalty.
b.They listen.
c.They are only answering to themselves.
d.They complete due diligence more quickly.
it is a best practice of very large hedge funds to check in on the status
of due diligence processes every three to four days.Giant Hedge Funds 121
7.True or false: In this chapter it is suggested that you forget about being
and institutional-quality operations in place.
HedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 8
Governance Best Practices
Excellence is an art won by training and habituation. We do not
have those because we have acted rightly. We are what we
—Aristotle
This chapter provides an interview-based overview of fund governance andthe ways in which many hedge funds are creating more robust checks and
balances in their own fund operations to prevent abuse and create a more
sustainable business at the same time.
Why important : Fund governance is by far the most consistently ignored
part of running a hedge fund as a real business. Every year the importance of
down or potential reversal of this trend.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund governance best practices and
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Governance
Fund governance is a valuable area to learn more about because most
and balance systems in place. Most funds are focused ﬁrst on managing their
123The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 124 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
portfolio and second on raising capital; operational issues or governance
procedures are often afterthoughts or formalities.
Lately the hedge fund industry has been marred by cases of fraud. In
some cases individual employees of a hedge fund committed acts which
placed the hedge fund manager’s business in jeopardy. If you don’t have
future employee to commit such acts. No internal control or structure can
STREET CAPITAL LLP
managing partner at Stratton Street Capital LLP. Andrew has been a key
participant in placing strong corporate governance rules in place since the
inception of the funds under management. His team has picked up manybest practices and processes which may aide other hedge fund managers or
investors who are seeking to better understand this concept.
Richard Wilson: Why have you personally taken such a strong interest in
implementing strong corporate governance procedures?
Andrew Main: Lessons of the past two years have shown that strong in-
dependent oversight of a hedge fund should be an important step in aninvestor’s due diligence regarding how a fund is run. As the hedge fund
opportunities to the investment manager or adviser in attracting investors
to the fund through their introductions and role in the process.
We are currently living and working through a very dynamic time. As
our industry increasingly becomes more institutionalized it moves awayfrom its reliance on a leveraged high net worth (HNW) client investor
base. Many funds will have also learned the lesson of relying too heavily
on the fund of funds sector but will want to attract institutional capital
directly. One of the roles of the fund of funds as the institutional investor’s
gatekeeper was to act as their eyes and ears on what was actually going
on in the fund or in the fund’s investment management company. Recentevents have shown that in many cases this reliance has not actually been
executed. Therefore small boutique funds and managers can easily adoptGovernance Best Practices 125
high corporate governance standards that will put many larger managers
to shame. The problem then is how does the institutional investor learnabout the manager and his funds?
Richard Wilson: How many board members should there be on a single
board?
Andrew Main: Our board has consisted of four to six members at any one
time. A diverse board is more valuable than a homogenous one.
Richard Wilson: Can you provide an example of how this has affected
potential investors who are completing due diligence on your funds?
Andrew Main: Several years ago we were going through a day’s due diligence
with a large institutional investor looking to open a managed accountwith us. It happened to coincide with the quarterly visit from one of the
fund’s independent board members making his own due diligence review.
We therefore suggested the two meet and sit down together and talk
had spent several hours asking many penetrating questions was lost forwords. He openly admitted never having had the opportunity to meet a
what to ask!
Richard Wilson: Let’s start with the basics. What is the purpose of the fund
board?
Andrew Main: To collectively be responsible for the central control of the
fund by overseeing the affairs of the appropriate interests of the sharehold-
ers and relevant stakeholders while at all times ensuring the protection of
investors.
Richard Wilson: Can you go into greater detail on exactly what responsi-
bilities the board should hold and what their role is? Maybe something
granular enough that hedge fund managers reading this could think aboutconstructing their own board?
tive responsibility for the statutory obligations of the fund as well as
review.
1.Statutory obligations may include such varied matters as:
a.Preparation of prospectus and constitutional documents; review
b.Interim report and accounts and the returns to regulators and stock
exchanges.
c.Compliance with listing rules and their continuing obligations.
d.Monitoring of marketing activities.
e.Equal treatment of shareholders.
f.Accountability to shareholders and responsibility to relevant stake-
holders.
to review once a year (we do it at the time of signing off full audited
has not strayed from its vision and mission as set out in the prospectus.It has a clear vision of its forward-going strategy and future develop-
ment. It is also a good idea to review where it has come in the past
important that each board member looks at the fund through a dif-ferent set of eyes. In an ideal world it is useful to have independent
decide on the appointment and review of the service providers of all
functions to the fund.
outside risk monitoring or third-party marketers of the fund. The board
should review its annual directors and ofﬁcers liability insurance to ensure
nal committees. The board should also review the overall compliance of
the fund to fulﬁll its functions and that all its statutory duties have been
fulﬁlled.
Richard Wilson: Could you summarize in a more concise way what the
high-level duties of board members are?
a bullet-point list of many of the responsibilities our board members
take on:
/squaresolidDevelopment and measuring against the company’s vision and mission.
/squaresolidStrategy of development plan and progress in achieving that plan.
/squaresolidSigniﬁcant changes in accounting policy.
/squaresolidApproval of risk management guidelines.
/squaresolidStatutory obligations such as monitoring of marketing activities and
investor relations procedures.
/squaresolidSufﬁcient and timely ﬁnancial information and reports provided to the
board.
/squaresolidEnsuring adequate resources are in place for ongoing operations.
/squaresolidDelegation of board powers to ad hoc committees as needed to addresscritical issues.
/squaresolidEnsuring internal controls and procedures are in place and are adequate.
/squaresolidObtaining appropriate and timely information to fulﬁll their obliga-tions.
/squaresolidReview of all internal and external audit and compliance reports and
associated regulatory reviews by third parties.
/squaresolidEnsuring that a satisfactory compliance regime exists and that all rel-
criminal activities are upheld.
Richard Wilson: That seems like more work and implementation than some
that their interests are being protected. The amount and depth of oversight
will obviously vary with the development of the fund. It is important not to
overload the total expense ratio of the fund with too many wise men but to
have sufﬁcient to carry out the basics in the early days of the fund. As thefund matures and we become much more involved in a world dominated
down in latest fashions but maintain a standard in the best interest of
shareholders and stakeholders.
Richard Wilson: The board oversees many activities. Can you summarize to
whom the board members are ultimately responsible?
the fund.
Richard Wilson: What other advice could you give about properly construct-
ing a board?
team was able to help us not only manage our corporate governance but
constantly improve it over time as well.
Richard Wilson: Many times when I hear hedge funds discuss corporate
may sometimes lead to putting off decisions on forming a board or havinga very active board that really oversees the activities of the fund. What
would be a concise way to describe the key purpose of the board?
Andrew Main: To collectively be responsible for maximizing the company’s
success by directing and supervising the affairs of the business and meeting
the appropriate interests of the shareholders and relevant stakeholders
while enhancing the value of the fund and ensuring protection of investors.
should they be conducted and structured to be effective?
Andrew Main: We hold quarterly meetings and the fund manager/adviser is
always present at these meetings. During the meeting we review the fund
governance reviews.
Richard Wilson: In this model some power is taken away from the fund
manager and placed with the board members. How do you monitor theirparticipation to ensure they are fulﬁlling their duties?
Andrew Main: We have the board assess whether members need to be
replaced. We allow in-person or over-the-phone participation by boardmembers but expect and have the majority of meetings attended in person.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any closing thoughts before we wrap
this up?
Andrew Wilson: A well-functioning board is an excellent trustee and a great
resource to all interested parties. Take the time to set up the board theGovernance Best Practices 129
right way and it will work for you over the long term. Make sure and use
the board in your due diligence processes.
Richard Wilson: Oftentimes there are references to nonexecutive advisory
boards or independent boards. Can you explain what the term nonexec-
utive really means?
do not have any fund managers on our boards. We want the fund man-
agers to report their activity to the board so there can be both integrationand independence between the two groups. That further shows the split
in roles. We feel that the board members should bring a different view
and so on. A nonexecutive does not form part of the executive manage-
ment of the fund manager or the funds investment decisions but performs
Richard Wilson: I have seen in some of your speeches on governance best
practices that you discuss the importance of “board packs.” Could youexplain what these are exactly?
Andrew Main: A board pack is collated by the fund administrator and is sent
out in advance of the meeting to be reviewed by the board of directors.
The topics in our last pack were:
/squaresolidApologies and appointment of alternates.
/squaresolidQuorum.
/squaresolidDirectors’ interests.
/squaresolidMatters arising.
/squaresolidReview of ﬁnancial statements (we reviewed our interims).
/squaresolidManager’s report.
/squaresolidFund manager reviews.
/squaresolidMarketing review.
/squaresolidCorporate governance review.
/squaresolidAnnual review of prospectus.
obligations.
/squaresolidFuture dates of meetings.
/squaresolidAny other business.130 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
associated with building this type of independent board?
Andrew Main: Overall cost of the meetings will be part of the administration
cost plus directors’ fees and expenses for attending the meeting. I would
The second interview we completed for this chapter of the book was with
in studying what good and poor governance mean they would be able to
explain some of the importance of having it in place and what that means
to investors.
Here is a brief history of David’s professional experience: David R.
LLC. His work in risk management and governance is internationally recog-
chair of the board and executive director of the Professional Risk Managers’
International Association (PRMIA) and president of the PRMIA Institute.
for his contributions to the global risk profession. He was also named as one
practice of risk management.
Richard Wilson: Let’s start at the top: Why is strong governance an impor-
tant thing for both hedge funds and corporations to have in place?
David R. Koenig: The quality of an organization’s governance affects its
governed ﬁrms have imbedded resilience and the ability to change as con-
strength provides them the opportunity to adjust to new realities. They
reform and they remain strong.
earnings for poorly governed companies because they represent a higher
risk of surprises. Work in psychology and behavioral ﬁnance has shown
that people have a strong drive for loss avoidance. They fear large losses
has been valued at more than two times the desire for gains. So compa-nies that present investors with the possibility of large losses are assigned
factor applied to their future earnings.
organization avoid pitfalls and avoid closing down due to operational
business missteps as well?
detracts from it.
Richard Wilson: Can you provide us with some governance factors you
look at in corporations that could also be assessed by investors looking at
hedge fund governance structures?
include:
/squaresolidChairman/CEO separation.
/squaresolidBoard composition.
/squaresolidOfﬁce turnover.
/squaresolidLate ﬁlings.
/squaresolidChange in external auditing.
/squaresolidShareholder controls.
companies “live” their governance—some factors include:
/squaresolidAccrued expenses.
/squaresolidDeferred taxes.
/squaresolidLate ﬁlings.
/squaresolidExtraordinary expenses.
/squaresolidActuarial assumptions related to pension liabilities.132 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: While governance is something that most fund managers
David R. Koenig: The difference may stem from whether you view your
a very different perspective on your relationship to your customers. Good
governance happens when the process of decision making and implemen-
intentional. You have such an intention when you focus on the needs of
your customers ﬁrst.
Richard Wilson: Everyone in the hedge fund industry talks about the need for
types of processes or access can hedge fund managers provide investors
to increase their level of transparency?
David R. Koenig: Clients have a right to understand what is being done with
the proprietary nature of the process we use.
Investors who are willing to sign a nondisclosure agreement with an
intellectual property clause related to the reverse-engineering of strategiescan have complete transparency with respect to all positions and all trans-
the fund with the appropriate transparency to our operations.
nance. They meet quarterly to review the risk management and governance
This is something distinctive in the investment management ﬁeld.
Richard Wilson: Over the past three years there have been many discussions
about hedge funds readjusting their management and performance fee
calculations to take a more long-term interest alongside the investor. The
argument is that if a hedge fund manager could potentially take on a largeGovernance Best Practices 133
$100 million-plus payday. What has your ﬁrm put into place to align theﬁnancial incentives of your fund more closely with your investors?
David R. Koenig: Our annual management fees range from 0.5 percent
to 2.0 percent of beginning period assets under management (AUM).
we give some of our fees back to the customer via a reduced management
fee. “Doing well” means hitting both our return and risk targets.
fund interests with a hard lock for two years from the date of payment.This further aligns the manager’s interests with those of our investors.
comes from two of the funds we have been engaged to manage.
Hurdle Rateof ReturnShare of
ExcessRate of Return
Cap forIncentive Fee
CalculationsEffective Cap on
Incentive Fees
Relative
Return
Strategy2.0% above
the index50% 8.0% above the
index3% of beginning
of period AUM
Absolute
Return
Strategy5.0% 30% 15% 3% of beginning
of period AUM
Richard Wilson: Others have also stressed the importance of using trusted
service providers who have expertise and a history of client relationships
in the hedge fund space. Do you agree with this approach?
David R. Koenig: Separation of duties and the engagement of leading service
providers are essential elements to an operationally sound and successful
control environment. We agree wholeheartedly.
Richard Wilson: Would you agree with me that hedge funds need to be
considering strong governance as a must-have instead of a nice-to-have in
today’s marketplace?
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter we discuss some governance best practices that hedge funds
this chapter include the following:
/squaresolidMany small to medium-size hedge funds have poor internal ﬁnancial
the investor in all decisions.
/squaresolidThe main purpose of an independent board for a hedge fund is to col-lectively be responsible for the central control of the fund by overseeingthe affairs of the appropriate interests of the shareholders and relevant
stakeholders while at all times ensuring protection of the investors.
/squaresolidEmploying hedge fund governance best practices not only protects your
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.No internal control structure can .
a.Completely prevent fraud.
b.Assure investors positive ﬁnancial returns.
c.Protect the capital within a hedge fund.
2.True or false: One of the reasons why fund governance is becoming
more important is that funds of hedge funds were somewhat seen as
conduct adequate due diligence and research.
3.Andrew Main suggests that a board should complete a strategic review
once a .
a.Month.
b.Quarter.
c.Year.
4.True or false: Independent boards of advisers should be constructed of
one type of professionals: forensic accounting and audit professionals.Governance Best Practices 135
This type of professional will always serve both the fund and investors
best.
5.It is suggested in this chapter that board meetings be conducted at least
once per .
a.Week.
b.Month.
c.Quarter.
d.Year.
6.What does it mean to have a nonexecutive board of advisers?
a.To have a board made up of professionals in other industries who
bring a unique view of the business.
b.To have a board made up of junior-level professionals with unique
perspectives on improving business operations.
c.To have a board which is made up of professionals who do not
also serve as portfolio managers or executives within the day-to-day
running of the fund.
7.The cost of building a good board should probably be around
per director on the board.
8.Good governance ; poor governance .
9.True or false: David R. Koenig believes that while good governance is
10. Poorly governed funds are more likely to have surprise
.
HedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 9
Frequently Asked Hedge
Fund Questions
—Tom Hopkins
asking the same questions that are covered here in this chapter.
HEDGE FUNDS 101
Question: What is a hedge fund?
Answer : A hedge fund is a private investment vehicle in which investors
in the fund typically are charged a management fee plus a performance-
equity funds and venture capital funds. While the hedge fund industry has
application of the name hedge fund to an increasing number of investment
and typical performance fees range from 15 to 30 percent. Investors are
drawn to hedge funds because they have strong incentives to perform very
well in order to take down a large dollar ﬁgure as part of the performancefee charged by the fund. While some would say this is a light version of the
that any more details would leave out billions of dollars worth of hedge fund
137The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 138 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
strategies and models. The industry truly is deﬁned by the fees the funds now
charge and how those are structured to the investor.
Question: What is a fund of hedge funds?
Answer : A fund of hedge funds is an investment fund that allows a single
investor broad access to many different hedge funds through one investment.
The fund of hedge funds typically researches dozens or hundreds of hedge
fund managers in order to optimize and invest for clients in a basket of
well-performing hedge funds. A fund of hedge funds earns fees on top ofthe hedge fund management and performance fees already embedded in this
type of investment. Investors are drawn to funds of hedge funds for the
superior research and due diligence conducted and the diversity of hedgefund risk exposures that may be found in these vehicles.
Question: What is the difference between a multistrategy hedge fund
and a fund of hedge funds?
Answer : A multistrategy hedge fund is a fund that runs multiple strate-
portfolio of unique hedge fund managers in the fund.
Question: What hedge fund books would you recommend reading?
Answer : We offer a free-to-download 200-plus-page e-book on hedge
has selected for the CHP Designation Program. We reviewed over 55
books on hedge funds before selecting this group of texts for our trainingprogram.
Question: What is the role of an institutional investment consultant?
Answer : Institutional investment consultants are investment advisers to
placed under the control and investment decision making of these insti-
tutional consultants. Hedge fund managers are typically interested in de-veloping strong relationships with institutional consultants because those
managers with over $80 million or $100 million in assets can often build
relationships with these consultants and possibly gain allocations from theirinstitutional investor clients.
Question: How strong is the industry outside of the United States and
Europe?Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 139
Answer : The hedge fund industry is diverse and spread out around
last year for lunch and he mentioned that he personally knew of over 300
funds similar to his which are based in S ˜ao Paulo. While many international
they house thousands of small to medium-size hedge fund managers who
together control a lot of assets and hire a respectable number of employeesas well.
Question: What is the quickest way to gain more knowledge about
hedge funds right now?
Answer : Many times I hear from professionals who have been reading
fund e-book and they are hungry to learn more. Here are my four top tips
on moving up the learning curve on everything hedge funds:
1.Our free 200-page hedge fund e-book (http://HedgeFundsBook.com).
and so on. This will allow Google to e-mail you once a week as new
Web stories or blog articles come out on hedge funds.
3.Subscribe to HedgeFundBlogger.com and receive our daily e-mail
newsletter about the hedge fund industry.
4.Subscribe to ﬁve educational blogs on the topic of hedge funds. Sug-
Village.Albourne.com.
HEDGE FUND OPERATIONS
Question: I am a solid trader with a solid back-tested model. Should I start
a hedge fund?
Answer : The hard truth is probably not. Most traders do not have the
level of pedigree or supporting capital that is needed to launch and grow a
and many funds do make it to a proﬁtable level of assets under management
(AUM) and do very well. It is important to do your research before you spend
Raising capital and growing a long track record that will attract investors
both take a long time and a lot of patience.140 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Question : What is one operational fund management process you could
provide me with that I can take away and really use in my business today?I need something low cost as we manage less than $100 million in assets as
a fund.
Answer: One person who has affected me in business has been William
along with another popular business quote: “What gets documented getsimproved.”
Most investment funds and family ofﬁces that I have worked with do not
and in many places the only documentation of their investment process is
presentations or a free program such as Bubbl (www.bubbl.us) to documenttheir processes.
This documenting of critical processes takes little time and costs noth-
PowerPoint together to describe a business process we were completing our-
we trained a third party to whom we decided to outsource some of this work.
The processes I have found valuable to document are:
/squaresolidInvestor acquisition process.
/squaresolidCurrent investor communication strategy.
/squaresolidHiring new employees.
/squaresolidManaging your portfolio on an ongoing basis.
Question: What exactly does a fund administration ﬁrm do? What is
the scope of their services?
Answer : A fund administration ﬁrm helps with the day-to-day opera-
tions of running a hedge fund. Activities that typical administration ﬁrms
may take on for a fund include:
/squaresolidMonthly accounting.
/squaresolidTax preparation assistance.
/squaresolidProcessing of subscriptions and redemptions.
/squaresolidThird-party controls.
/squaresolidAudit assistance.
/squaresolidAnti–money laundering (AML) compliance.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 141
/squaresolidInvestor communications.
/squaresolidDaily reconciliation of trades.
/squaresolidEmployee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) tracking.
/squaresolidOperational assistance.
/squaresolidManagement company accounting.
Question: What are your top ﬁve pieces of advice for a hedge fund that
is just now starting up?
Answer : Our ﬁrm speaks with over 300 hedge fund start-ups and emerg-
ing hedge fund managers each year. We typically hear from managers when
their new funds. Here are our top ﬁve tips for hedge fund start-ups:
place before you start your fund.
2.Focus on developing a unique investment process and competitive
advantage in the industry: What unique edge can you constantly bebuilding?
3.Risk management and institutionalization are key for your fund. Focus
on how to be more transparent than your competitors. Decide where
institutional quality of your fund offering.
4.Investors want to see that you have skin in the game. Make sure you do
have some of yourself invested and communicate that to investors.
Question : Do you have any suggestions on how we could run our hedge
fund business better from an operational or business point of view so that
we are seen as more of an authority in the industry?
Answer : Sure. One way in which people are inﬂuenced every day
is through our orienting reﬂex. The orienting reﬂex is the process we
enjoyable.
When a loud alarm goes off we stop and ask ourselves why it is going
off and whether it has any impact on us. If you are in the middle of a
look around for a minute before taking action. Each person is orienting142 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
they are most easily inﬂuenced. This same rule applies to changes in stock
market conditions and the reaction of Wall Street analysts and investment
news broadcasters.
If you can be the person to suggest a strategy or provide additional
can be very inﬂuential very quickly.
You can apply this in your fund by being the ﬁrst to address an industry
event like Madoff. Interpret these events and focus on making sense of what
will likely come next. This can be done on a smaller level with events that
come up each quarter in the industry.
Question: How can I network with other hedge fund managers and
industry professionals?
Answer : The best way to network with other hedge fund managers
HedgeFundGroup.org and clicking on the “Join” link at the top right-hand
side of the home page.
HEDGE FUND MARKETING AND SALES
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a 45-minute video on hedge fund marketing best
HedgeFundTraining.com/Capital-Raising-Strategies
Question : What does a typical third-party marketing arrangement look like?
What are the payouts like?
Answer : Third-party marketing arrangements typically involve the mar-
keter receiving 20 percent of both the management and performance fees
the third-party marketing industry.
Question: We are looking for capital. Would a hedge fund invest in my
real estate venture or private company?
Answer : The hedge fund universe is diverse and there are hedge funds
Question: How long will it take us to raise capital after we launch our
fund?
Answer : The sales cycle is six to nine months long in retail channels
and 9 to 18 months long in institutional channels. This assumes that yourfund has a three- to ﬁve-year or longer track record and a high enough level
of AUM to approach each of these markets. Raising capital from investors
other than friends and family in your ﬁrst two years is very challenging.
The best route of action is to consider seed capital or approach high net
worth (HNW) accredited investors for potential investments. Even the most
really work through their contact Rolodex and use all of their methods of
anyone you hire or bring on as a third-party marketer for the fund.
Question : Can you provide us some tips on how to develop relationships
with investors? Is there a process we could follow at a very high level?
training materials last year from Mr. Frank Kern and came across a market-
think about these things to ensure that you are presenting a complete mar-keting message to your potential fund investors. In the marketing training
prospects through different phases of engaging your ﬁrm:
2.Trust . Develop a relationship with the potential investor. Build trust
which can be tangibly displayed or conﬁrmed.
that you serve so they can imagine being in that position.
The descriptions of these four steps are less important than the pro-
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Question : How could we improve our PowerPoint pitch book for in-
vestors?
often provide to fund managers looking to improve their PowerPoint pre-
sentations:
/squaresolidQuarterly update . Most potential investors will have already seen your
tor to spend an hour reviewing the presentation after each major review;
this costs less than $100.
frequently using terms that are seen too often in generic industry pre-sentations. You have to let out enough of your secret sauce in your
marketing materials so that others know there is actually something
and parameters for operating. Here is some advice on each of the three
most important sections of your PowerPoint presentation:
1.Team pedigree. Take the time to describe all of the relevant experi-
ways that mesh well with your ﬁrm’s investment process and ap-proach to managing risk. Many types of experience can be valuable
tion needs to be spelled out in the presentation. If after creating this
section you realize that your team consists of just one or two pro-
and portfolio management. Many times investors will ask how much
ﬁcer about noting this in your presentation materials. Many investors
evidence of this in your fund sometimes helps. It is important to re-
to include a team hierarchy tree in your presentation. This may in-clude your advisory team and a few service providers or research
groups with whom you work daily and upon whom you rely for
operations.
2.Investment process. This is most commonly the area of PowerPoint
then be broken down further during a due diligence phone call or in
followed by one to two pages explaining each step of the process
to the PowerPoint on buy and sell decision triggers: When do you
trim a position? When do you sell? When are positions cleared outcompletely? What stop-loss provisions are in place? Providing a few
trading case studies in this part of the PowerPoint may be helpful.
Use real-life examples from the previous quarter and update these
frequently so that analysts will be able to read into your decisions in
context of the recent market conditions.
3.Risk management techniques. Risk management techniques can be
placed in a separate section of the presentation or tacked onto the end
of your investment process section in the PowerPoint. It is hard to
or experience that provides additional insight into how you manage
risk in your portfolio.
/squaresolidMore is more. It is often better to go overboard with details on your
investment processes and risk management details than not to provide
a single presentation. Getting your PowerPoint right is about balanc-
minutes to review your one-pager can be a challenge of its own.
Creating a solid PowerPoint presentation is a task of continual improve-
the sub–$200 million hedge funds that we often speak with.
Question : What should we look at while interviewing a third-party
marketer we may hire?
Answer : Evaluating a potential marketer should be as rigorous as
professionals can be expensive in terms of both real dollars and opportu-
nity costs. Areas to cover while conducting due diligence on a third-partymarketer include:
/squaresolidPast work experience.
/squaresolidCurrent licensing and broker check.
/squaresolidAsset-raising history throughout their careers.
/squaresolidAsset-raising track record while working together in the ﬁrm.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 147
/squaresolidReferrals from past hedge fund clients.
/squaresolidNumber of years experience.
/squaresolidScope of their distribution channel expertise.
/squaresolidNumber of total current clients.
/squaresolidPotential commitment of time in terms of hours per week and duration
of the contract.
/squaresolidPersonality and culture of the third-party marketing group.
Question : What trends have you seen in terms of the types of investors
now out there in the hedge fund industry?
four categories:
1.The “Follow me” hedge fund investor. Most of these investors make up
recommendations from either you or someone you may know. If you
2.The “Send me a prospectus” hedge fund investor. This group is a
bit more sophisticated and conducts a minimum amount of due dili-gence into the manager’s performance. Once they are satisﬁed with the
manager is taken on faith and the information is not properly veriﬁedby the investor.
3.The investigating hedge fund investor. This type of investor is sometimes
considered a nuisance by busy professionals who might be caught off-guard by his questions. Not only will the investor keep the manager’s
beyond the previous types and will go so far as to understand the entireoperation of the fund as if he were the manager. This type will also
interview members of the manager’s staff and will look into the balance148 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
to performance.
4.The independent hedge fund investor. The due diligence collected by
this investor is thoroughly reviewed independently. Investors in this cat-
egory know that independent opinions are extremely important. They
the SEC and/or state securities agency. They won’t sign on the dot-
and even a year-end audit. They fully understand the risks that are
involved.
quality PowerPoint presentations and third-party analyses for those most
scrutinizing parties. My experience has been that marketing materials that
what steps do you need to take dealing with these guys? Is it any differentfrom dealing with family ofﬁces?
Answer : Marketing to ﬁnancial advisers is much different from market-
ing to single and multifamily ofﬁces. Here are the main differences between
the two:
involving consultants or internal analysts who do nothing but look athedge funds or alternative investment products.
/squaresolidFinancial advisers have lower minimum asset levels for what they willconsider investing. Ninety percent of family ofﬁces only seriously con-
many require $250 $300 million or even $1 billion in assets undermanagement.
and some purposely don’t even have a web site.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 149
many ﬁnancial advisers work with a broad spectrum of client types.This might require more caution by them and by your fund in market-
ing products to them. It might also mean sorting through more ﬁnancial
advisers to ﬁnd one with several HNW clients.
motivated by how they will earn a commission or income from the
complete their due diligence and committee meetings; it is a very long
sales process.
/squaresolidBoth family ofﬁces and ﬁnancial advisers require genuine relationship-
building efforts and tenacity.
From a legal standpoint there may be other precautions your fund should
space.
start-up hedge fund with no name recognition and with principals who have
no name recognition and no pedigree in the alternative investment world?I would say 12 months at best. What do you think?
Answer : I would say 16 to 20 months would be realistic if they keep
$1 million a week in new assets.
Question : Do you have a quick takeaway lesson that I could apply to my
business development work for our family of hedge funds? There is always
so much to get done and so little time to do it. What advice would you
give us?
Answer : Following is a quote I used recently while speaking with an
investment fund manager who was looking to raise capital. He was doing
so by approaching every investor he could possibly speak to. He was ex-
plaining how his ﬁrm has so few resources compared to their $1 billion
competitors.150 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
thing: Focus.
—Brian Tracy
to your fund. If you can dial in on these three areas—your hot prospect
quickly.
Question : For this question and answer exchange I actually went to
press is restricted by law in many places?
funds from a pool of existing investors. Hedge funds are prohibited from
Most ﬁnancial journalists have contact with a hedge fund manager or
forth between the media and hedge fund managers is off the record. The
process.
Most hedge fund managers are still extremely reticent when it comes to
speaking to the media. What I’ve found is that it’s very difﬁcult to solicit
managers to work with a PR ﬁrm.
Dukas says that the reticence comes from a feeling that hedge fund
managers should be secretive and not share their ideas with anyone but
managers will realize] what they’re doing is not so secretive after all.
As an example of a hedge fund that has embraced the concept of working
racked up considerable press over the past few years.
feel that hedge fund managers need PR people is the rise of activist investing.
ratcheted up what we call “cage rattling” last year. The normal sequencegoes something like this:
1.A hedge fund builds up a large stake in a company by buying stock on
the open market because the fund feels the stock is undervalued.
2.The fund approaches management and the board of the company and
offers suggestions about how to unlock the value of the stock.
way.
rattling through an SEC ﬁling (usually attaching letters that it has sent
the company’s management and board).
have latched onto the ideas put forth by hedge funds and begun demand-
hedge funds need public relations people because companies inherently have
utilizing their public relations resources to work the media and investors.
One good example of the company-versus-fund public relations mentality isTime Warner.
$12.5 billion stock repurchase. (Stock repurchases help companies boost152 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
didn’t do everything that Icahn asked.
this difﬁculty.
The main point to take home here is that there are public relations
strategies and campaigns which hedge fund managers can keep in mind and
follow. There are ethical and legal ways to promote or position a fund; itjust takes someone who has been there before to accomplish this.
Question: How are in-house hedge fund marketers typically compen-
sated?
Answer : There are half a dozen models for compensating in-house mar-
combined with a small percentage of fees from new assets raised and trails
them past a certain threshold set in the employment contract. This is most
Question : I have done a lot of cold-calling for the hedge fund I am
to mind:
they are doing. If you cared you would have done some research on theFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 153
company ﬁrst and you would have something more intelligent to ask
them. This might sound harsh but it is true. Do your homework ﬁrst.
2.Keep in mind that thousands of people cold-call and several people are
probably calling the same or very similar prospects as the ones you
have your calls or e-mails go unanswered. The goal is to develop enough
perceived value so they will take your call the next time or call you when
they are ready to buy your product or service.
trying to do 6 to 10 calls an hour will keep you on your toes and always
dialing more prospects. Create a game out of the process.
4.Smile while you dial. The tone of your voice and word choice both
change based on your own feelings and facial expressions. Be happy
take notice.
5.Call the CEO. Always call the CEO. They are the masters of every other
department and if a call or e-mail gets forwarded from them down to
responded to than coming in through an analyst or associate with theﬁrm.
to plan out your work for the next day. Break the day into 30-minute
most people even get to work in the morning.
7.Prepare a standard e-mail that you send out before you call. Anyone
can send a great follow-up e-mail to a phone call—the trick is getting
the prospect on the phone in the ﬁrst place. Don’t have them refuseto take your call because they do not know who you are. E-mail the
call 10 minutes after sending the e-mail out.
What is interesting about making all of these phone calls is listening to
how differently people sound and react during these conversations.
I remember one day last year I called someone who was unqualiﬁed.
It turned out that their company didn’t even provide the type of service I
was hoping to discuss. I made a joke about sending him a personal check or
I had never once had someone be so friendly and up-front like that. It was
a refreshing change from the monotone burnt-out tone of voice I usually
end up listening to. What is important is not what happened during this
phone call but after I realized how valuable a contact he had given me. I felt
strongly obligated to thank him or repay him in some way.
This has taught me to always see the humor in situations and give value
away freely to those in need of help.
One last unrelated sales phone call lesson I have learned is that if you
happy to talk to you because your service is relevant to them and necessary
for their success.
Question : What advice can you give me about networking with investors
and other hedge fund managers?
Answer : The best part about writing in HedgeFundBlogger.com each
full in raising capital right now for a set number of funds.
success in life is simply showing up.” Show up at your local CHP and hedge
multiyear relationships in the industry. Maybe even join the Hedge Fund
Group for free and start networking there.
Question : Why is capital raising so difﬁcult?
Answer : Here’s one take:
/squaresolidForty-four percent of all salespeople quit trying after the ﬁrst call.
/squaresolidTwenty-four percent quit after the second call.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 155
/squaresolidFourteen percent quit after the third call.
/squaresolidTwelve percent quit trying to sell their prospect after the fourth call.
while 60 percent of all sales are made after the fourth call. This means that
the overwhelming majority of hedge fund sales professionals don’t even give
themselves a shot at selling their products.
Question: Do you have any advice for creating a contract to work with
a third-party marketer? This is our ﬁrst time going through this process.
slowly. Meet with your legal counsel before you even begin to speak with
third-party marketing ﬁrms so that you know what questions to ask up front.
If possible have a contract you would prefer to work under on hand so you
do not have to take their contract and modify it to your needs. Interview and
meet face-to-face with several third-party marketers who have references andtrack records of raising assets so you can start to pick out the smooth talkers
from those with real evidence of having successfully raised capital. Typically
retainer to those ﬁrms that are spending time on marketing your fund every
Answer : All three types of professionals raise capital for hedge funds.
be accustomed to being paid small lump sums instead of a small percentage
of the management and performance fees over time. Third-party marketers
are independent capital raisers who use their Rolodex and reﬁned capital-
raising processes to raise the AUM levels of several fund managers at any
for the trading ﬁrm that supports them.156 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
HEDGE FUND CAREERS
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Career
Question : How important is ethics or ethical policies in the hedge fund
industry?
Answer : It’s important. In the hedge fund industry you have one name
The FBI recently had agents posing as a Florida-based hedge fund man-
ager to nab 10 individuals in ﬁve kickback schemes connected to securitiessales. The SEC charged 10 individuals and the U.S. Attorney’s ofﬁce charged
six with criminal offenses.
it explicitly known that what was going on was illegal and unethical. “This
case illustrates the Commission’s ability to work together with criminalauthorities in creative ways to uncover fraudulent schemes and to protect
Bottom line: If you are smart enough and hardworking enough to be
Question: Is there a professional training or certiﬁcation program for
hedge fund professionals?
http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the credibility and global recognition of the
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Credibility
Question: How do I get started working in the hedge fund industry?
Answer : There are many steps to starting a hedge fund career. Here are
six of the ﬁrst ones you should take:
1.The ﬁrst thing you need to do to start a career in the industry is to read
if you do not complete this ﬁrst step. To learn as much as possible in
Make sure to read at least two books on hedge fund careers and at least
two books on hedge funds as an industry.
commitment and loyalty to get in.
3.Identify two to three hedge fund industry career mentors. Identify a
fessional who could help provide you with advice and guidance on ev-erything from crafting your resume to interviewing for open positions.
4.Complete one or more internships in the industry. It does not matter
will get into the industry and gain internships. At the beginning you mayhave to work for free to gain initial experience.
5.Develop a unique value proposition to potential employers. Reﬂect on
and education. Decide how you could effectively present that as a great
package to the hedge funds or service providers to whom you are apply-ing for jobs. Do not be generic; come up with speciﬁc skills and abilities
that allow you to stand out.
6.Some skills that stand out to hedge fund managers include quantitative
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Question: What are the top mistakes often made by hedge fund career
professionals?
Answer : There are ﬁve mistakes that our team sees hedge fund pro-
fessionals and students making while trying to obtain employment in the
these mistakes are what we see most commonly made from this perspective
of the industry:
1.Annoying . Every week we speak with professionals who are very pas-
sionate about working in the hedge fund industry. They will do almost
show this while networking and during interviews. The problem is that
it can come off as overbearing and desperate. The more successful a
the better the employer they will probably be as well. This means that
the best employers have the least patience for those potential job candi-
dates who send in three to four e-mails a week or leave two voice mailsin a single day regarding open jobs or whether their resume has been
reviewed.
2.Overconﬁdent . One ironic aspect about growing a career or gaining
or lessons that you now realize you will have to master. Experienced
of ignorance or a low tolerance for any teaching or instruction that may
be required to complete the job well.
3.Long resumes and e-mails. This goes hand-in-hand with point 1 on not
want to explain all of these in a single two- to three-page e-mail. This
is a huge mistake; these e-mails are instantly deleted. Nobody in theindustry has time to ready 20 essays by potential candidates on why
they should be hired. Keep your e-mails down to three to ﬁve sentences
4.Generic . Do whatever you can so that you are not generic. Nobody
or intelligent. Deﬁne your skill set and unique skills before the interview
so you can ensure that the potential employer remembers them after theinterview.
5.Nothing but passion . We see many professionals trying to enter the
industry with nothing but a business degree and a lot of passion and
must work your way into small internships and research projects. You
must always be reading more about hedge funds and the specializedknowledge the job you are aiming for requires.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on top ﬁve hedge fund career mis-
HedgeFundTraining.com/Mistakes
Question : Do you have a system for career development or improvement
that you could share with us who are within our ﬁrst ﬁve to seven years ofour career?
Answer : Yes. There is a formula that I have used over the past seven
and that is the SKAR formula. This is not a way to shortcut the hard work
SKAR Development Formula
Specialized Knowledge +Authority +Results
=Huge growth opportunities and faster development
within your career or business
SKAR Deﬁnitions
marketer. The difference between having specialized knowledge and
not having it could mean the difference between spending 18 months
to complete a task or project and being able to develop strong client
relationships and complete the same task in just three months. Having
on how you can further develop your specialized knowledge include:
/squaresolidRead two books/month for the next two years on the area of spe-
cialized knowledge that is going to beneﬁt your business or career
most.
/squaresolidSubscribe to three of the best newsletters from blogs or experts in your
industry which are notrehashed press releases and garbage news. You
two to three valuable free newsletters in each industry.
/squaresolidComplete a niche training and certiﬁcation program speciﬁc to your
area of specialized knowledge. Having a third party verify that you
have obtained a certain level of specialized knowledge is always going
to be more credible than your own statement that “I like to read books
online certiﬁcation program and start one within six months. Thiswill force you to read and learn more within your niche.
creating a free blog at Blogger.com and start synthesizing what you
are learning and combining other ideas to create your own originalconcepts (such as this blog post).
/squaresolidAuthority means creating structures around your ﬁrm or self so that
a small group of ﬁve to seven consulting clients. The better-positionedprofessional will reap rewards from new opportunities coming toward
and within the book he uses the phrase “swimming downhill.” It wasa way to swim so that your body is tilted forward and you literally cut
continually downward into the water. If you get authority positioning
day when he was 46 years old; now in his ﬁfties he has more than 10
never scrambles for new business. His phone literally rings off the hook
specialized knowledge and authority positioning quickly. Being able
is very powerful and carries authority. Note: The more strongly you
and reﬁned your questions will be. Ever done an interview with a
journalist who has never worked in your ﬁeld? Not always fun or162 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
three seconds.
/squaresolidTake what you have written within your own newsletter or blog and
self-publish a book with 60 to 80 pages of single-spaced text. Anyone
can do this for $15 at Lulu.com. Very simple—no more excuses thatyou do not have a book deal. I got my second big investment mar-
keting contract partially because I had a self-published book in hand
and someone gave me a chance based on my dedication to the niche.
The book positions you as an authority.
are looking for others with unique ideas and lessons to share. And
adds credibility because others have stopped their business days andinvested their valuable time to listen to what you have to say.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
challenging. Some types of tangible results that can be shared include:
/squaresolidAn actual printed-out version of part of the service or end result of
the product or service.
/squaresolidVideo (preferred) or text (not as good) testimonials from past and
/squaresolidThe ﬁrst 15 to 20 percent of the product or your service given away
/squaresolidDiverse and numerous case studies of past clients or employers. This
imagine you solving their problem.
site which provides the potential client with immediate beneﬁt. This
best interests in mind.
Another related topic that I don’t have space to go into here is that
underlying all three of these SKAR items is having the right habits. Habitshave been shown to form 96 percent of what we do every single day. We tend
elements of the SKAR formula are you using each week? When you read
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Question: Could you recommend three books on hedge fund careers?
on hedge funds online at http://HedgeFundsCareer.com. After that I would
books combined will provide you with a good historic background of the
and some tips on networking and connecting with hedge fund managers.
Question : I have been trying to get into the hedge fund industry for over
four months now with no real progress. I’m about to give up and I just don’t
know whether there is any hope for someone like me with no Ivy Leagueeducation or experience yet in the industry.
Answer : I made it into the industry and did well with neither of those
Here are some tips for building and keeping a positive attitude for when you164 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
are trying to overcome a challenge such as breaking into the hedge fund
industry. This is what I do for my own goals and business:
/squaresolidI work out at least three times a week.
/squaresolidI have several three- to four-minute motivational podcasts or audio
book clips on my iPod that I can listen to on the way to work.
/squaresolidI read 15 pages of attitude-changing articles or books every morning
while I am eating breakfast (see Jeffrey Gitomer’s Little Gold Book of
/squaresolidI have created a one-page laminated sheet with the top 50 business and
investment web sites that rank in the top three slots of Google search
/squaresolidI try to ﬁnd a lesson to be learned from each negative experience. If
about yourself.
ting into Harvard and moving to Boston; now it is learning all I can
Web marketing. As soon as you stop being curious and challenged you
become stale and unmotivated.
/squaresolidI cut off or drastically reduce communication with negative people.
/squaresolidI don’t watch the local news. It is worthless. How often do you see a
read it online for ﬁve minutes and save yourself some time.
Question : What would be your advice regarding third-party marketing?
Is this trend dying out or growing? I am trying to learn more about the
space.
Answer : If you are starting a third-party marketing career you are in
good company: Dozens of highly experienced investment and hedge fund
each year. While some professionals may leave an investment manager or
work or partner with an existing third-party marketing ﬁrm. The beneﬁts of
political and corporate risks while having the potential of earning two to four
times more than you would with the same experience while working for a
large institution such as Morgan Stanley or Goldman Sachs. As the economy
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Careers
Question: I am a 38-year-old insurance executive and I have always
wanted to work in the hedge fund industry. Do you believe it is too late tomake a career change?
Answer: We get at least one question like this each month from profes-
rate best practices training and some skill set that will help a fund manager
detail-oriented investment professionals to help move their business forward.
to try meeting with local service providers and small hedge funds start-ups
or emerging hedge funds. A face-to-face meeting is worth 10 phone callswhen it comes to networking.
Question: I am about to enroll in the CHP Designation Program. What
does the program include? What is the process that I will go through?
Answer: The CHP Designation is an online self-study training and cer-
tiﬁcation course on hedge funds. Once you join the program you will be
on certain speciﬁc subjects. Your exam is conducted 100 percent online
from wherever you are based. Over 40 percent of our participants com-
plete the CHP Designation from outside of the United States. Learn more at
http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
Question: What are your top tips for those who would like to start a
career in the hedge fund industry? Anything else unique to what you have
already mentioned?
/squaresolidBe absolutely sure you actually want to work in the hedge fund industry.
because this industry is very competitive and it takes dedication and
hard work to do well in the hedge fund industry.
/squaresolidBecome a student of the hedge fund industry. Study the industry every
You need to speak the language of the industry.
/squaresolidUse the three-circles strategy from Jim Collins. Collins suggests to move
Question : I am attending your Hedge Fund Premium seminar network-
ing event next month in New York. I have never been to a networking eventbefore and I wanted to see if you had a few quick tips on networking for
me. Anything you can share?
Answer : If you’re looking to enter the hedge fund industry either work-
conferences are a great way to get your foot in the door.
those who attend. Here are ﬁve tips that should prepare you for attending a
networking event or conference:
2.Don’t scare people off . Another mistake is to be too forward when
to land a job in the hedge fund industry. Instead of sharing insights and
who are not currently hiring. This is the wrong mentality. Assuming
you have been following the industry and paid good attention to the
Ask questions when appropriate and listen when the other person is
to hear someone complain about not working in private equity. But you
should mention it when the timing is appropriate.
3.Get your name out there . If you cannot ﬁnd a hiring ﬁrm or no ﬁrms
out there. It may just be an inconvenient moment or the person you are
in another quarter the ﬁrm may be looking for a new auditor and still
when the ﬁrm is eventually hiring they will probably have your name
on ﬁle.
Be concise and include only essential information.
5.Look and act like a professional. Even though you are not at work
Question : I am looking to work in the third-party marketing space. Do
you have any career advice or book recommendations for those who want
to work in third-party marketing? Do you have advice for getting a job in
this niche industry?168 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Answer : There are no great books on third-party marketing that I am
if you look around on Amazon. If you are looking for great books just on
my career.
Hedge fund marketing and sales fee structures vary depending on the
once and only get paid on commission. Usually commissions are 20 percent
of both the base fee and performance fee when working with hedge funds.
you would probably get to market two to three different money managers
professional. Common compensation for internal hedge fund salespeople is
route because I want to be able to have knowledge of the DNA and powerful
where the real money and momentum are and be able to shift my focus to
that point. I believe it is harder to get a 3PM job because most want you to
The following is a list of book bonuses that we have negotiated or set
up on behalf of readers of this book. By purchasing this book you have
CHP Designation Tuition Discount: To thank those who have pur-
15 and July 15. Learn more at http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
Value of discount: $100.
for purchasing this book and receive 30 percent off your ﬁrst pur-chase made at InvestorDatabases.com. Investor Databases provides
over a dozen databases that include complete contact details for
discount: $800+.
receipt for purchasing this book and receive three months’ freeaccess to HedgeFundPremium.com and a lifetime membership
rate of just $12/month instead of the public price of $27/month.
HedgeFundPremium.com is an exclusive membership program
for hedge fund professionals. Members gain access to exclusive
resources. Value of discount: $200+ (ﬁrst-year value).
your receipt for purchasing this book and receive 40 percent off
169The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
.com. Value of discount : $250+(ﬁrst-year value).
for purchasing this book and receive $50 off any hedge fund au-
Value of discount : $100.
your receipt for purchasing this book and receive 30 percent off
your ﬁrst purchase made at HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com. The
Hedge Fund Investor Directory was constructed by the Hedge Fund
in hedge fund managers. Explore the packages we offer at http://HedgeFundInvestorDirectory/Buy.html. Value of discount : $329.APPENDIX B
Example Due Diligence Questions
QUESTIONNAIRE
Investment Adviser
Request for Information
A.Corporate Background
1.Name and address of ﬁrm.
2.Principal contact.
3.When was your ﬁrm founded?
4.Is your ﬁrm a registered investment adviser? A commodity trading
adviser? A commodity pool operator?
5.Is your ﬁrm afﬁliated with a broker-dealer?
6.What is the organizational structure of your ﬁrm?
7.Have there been any material organizational changes in the past ﬁveyears?
8.What is the current number of employees at your ﬁrm? Please pro-
vide a breakdown by category.
a.Portfolio managers:
b.Research analysts:
c.Client services:
d.Administration:
e.Other:
9.Please provide a breakdown of your ﬁrm’s assets under management
for the following time periods:
Year Assets # Accounts
1992
1993
19941995
1996
1997
171The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 172 APPENDIX B: EXAMPLE DUE DILIGENCE QUESTIONS
1998
1999
2000
20012002
2003
20042005
2006
20072008
2009
2010
10. Please list the number of accounts/assets gained/lost during the fol-
lowing periods:
Year Accounts
Gained Assets
Gained AccountsLost Assets
Lost
19981999
2000
20012002
2003
20042005
2006
20072008
2009
2010
11. Please list all states in which your ﬁrm is currently registered to
conduct advisory business.
12. What backup technology measures are in place to ensure the in-
tegrity of account access and information? What are your disaster
retrieval procedures?a.Security:
b.Disaster recovery:Appendix B: Example Due Diligence Questions 173
B.Legal and Compliance
1.Please detail your ﬁrm’s ﬁdelity bonding and errors and omissions
3.Please list all NASD broker-dealers with whom your ﬁrm works.
4.Who has custody of your accounts? Please detail.
5.What is the procedure for reviewing new accounts?
6.Describe the ﬂow of client funds from the initial deposit with your
ﬁrm to the placement at the custodian.
frequency and process.
8.Please outline management control procedures.
C.Investment Methodology
1.Please describe your ﬁrm’s investment methodology for asset
allocation and/or market timing that is utilized by your program.
2.What technical and/or fundamental indicators does the program
utilize? Please provide a description of the portfolio models and
indicators tracked.
3.Please list the asset classes in your investment models.
detail.
5.Describe the process of selecting an investment for use in a model.
makes up the committee?
6.How are client risk tolerance and objectives incorporated into the
investment decision-making process?
7.How often is client information updated to ensure that the risk
tolerance and objectives are still applicable?
8.How are buy/sell decisions made?
10. What resources are devoted to internal research? Are external
sources used?
12. Describe the frequency and process for adjusting the asset allocation
mix. How are these adjustments implemented?174 APPENDIX B: EXAMPLE DUE DILIGENCE QUESTIONS
basis?
14. What are the criteria for reallocation and rebalancing a port-
folio?
15. Do clients have the option to purchase securities that are not part
segregated?
16. For market timers/asset allocators: How many switches are there in
an average year?
17. For private portfolio managers: What is the turnover rate of
portfolios? Average number of holdings?
18. What percentage of the time do you anticipate being invested in the
markets for each investment discipline managed by your ﬁrm?
19. Please detail all changes in investment philosophy since inception.
20. What professional standards are required of your portfolio man-
D.Fee Structure
1.Please describe in detail your fee structure and sharing arrange-
representatives or solicitors terminating their relationship with thebroker-dealer.
2.Are the fees charged comparable to those charged by similar ser-
vices?
3.What is the refund policy should a client opt not to continue to
employ your services?
expenses.
commissions offset?
how is the market value of these securities valued for purposes ofbilling?
E.Performance Record
1.Please provide a detailed explanation related to the basis of
presentation relative to your performance record. Please ensure
the composite.Appendix B: Example Due Diligence Questions 175
2.Is this performance record the result of any linkage with a prior
methodologies.
who?
4.Are the personnel responsible for your performance record still with
5.Please provide a quarter-by-quarter performance composite (gross
and net of advisory fees) for at least 10 years (if available) for
your portfolio. Is this composite AIMR compliant? What level ofAIMR compliance (Level I or Level II)? Please provide your AIMR
disclosure language along with the composite return information.
F.Client Notiﬁcation
1.Do your statements satisfy ERISA guidelines?
3.With what frequency are the statements generated?
4.Does your ﬁrm provide tax reporting beyond the 1099 reporting
provided by the custodian?APPENDIX C
Top Hedge Fund Web Sites
Following is a list of top hedge fund and alternative investment web sites
run by our team and others that was ﬁrst published by HedgeFundBlogger
.com.
HedgeFundBlogger.com: The number one most popular web site on
resources here that you would have to pay a subscription for else-where. (http://HedgeFundBlogger.com)
oldest and most well-rounded web sites in the hedge fund industry.
(http://Village.Albourne.com)
ing information related to starting and growing a career in the hedge
fund industry. (http://HedgeFundsCareer.com)
FINalternatives : Great well-rounded news web site on alternative invest-
ments in general. This web site is not exclusively focused on hedge
(www.ﬁnalternatives.com)
Hedge Fund Blogspot by Veryan Allen: In-depth analytical takes on re-
cent hedge fund industry trends and challenges. Veryan provides aunique view of the industry as a risk portfolio management consul-
tant. (http://hedgefund.blogspot.com)
SEC Guide to Hedge Funds: A must-read web site for anyone who is
starting to complete research on hedge funds as potential invest-
ments. (www.sec.gov/answers/hedge.htm)
ThirdPartyMarketing.com: The only free-to-access educational web
177The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 178 APPENDIX C: TOP HEDGE FUND WEB SITES
that provides consulting advice to both marketers and fund man-
New York Times DealBook: Hedge Funds : This blog is hosted by the
New York Times and covers developing hedge fund stories each day.
Great place to get some insight and opinion on top of the regular
news. (http://dealbook.blogs.nytimes.com/category/hedge-funds/)
Hedge Fund Startup Guru.com : Articles and videos for emerging hedge
considering launching a new fund. (http://HedgeFundStartupGuru.
com)
Investopedia on Hedge Funds : This web site provides over a dozen ed-
ucational articles of more than 800 words each on hedge funds.It reads like a short magazine on long-term hedge fund indus-
hedgefund.asp)
Family Ofﬁces Group : The educational web site of the largest fam-
ily ofﬁce networking association in the wealth management in-dustry. It contains over 500 articles and videos on family ofﬁces.
(http://FamilyOfﬁcesGroup.com)
put together by Harvard University on hedge funds. It is a bit
dated now but still holds valuable leads to additional resources.
(www.library.hbs.edu/guides/hedgefunds/index
print.html)
HedgeFundMessageBoard.com : Industry forum for hedge fund pro-
fessionals and hedge fund managers. (http://HedgeFundMessageBoard.com)
PrimeBrokerageGuide.com: The number one web site on the hedge fund
prime brokerage niche industry. (http://primebrokerageguide.com)Glossary
Following is a list of top hedge fund and alternative investment terms and
keywords that are important to understand if you are going to work in
the hedge fund industry.
alpha Alpha goes a step further than excess return and adds risk to the equation.
Alpha is the portfolio’s risk-adjusted performance or the “value added” pro-
itive alpha indicates that a portfolio has produced returns above the expected
level—at the same level of risk—and a negative alpha suggests the portfolio
underperformed given the level of risk assumed.
orders and may usually perform the duties involved in customer support call
centers.
a security or portfolio is relative to the whole market. A diversiﬁed portfoliowith a beta of 1.0 would indicate that the portfolio would respond in tandem
with the market. A beta greater than 1.0 indicates that a portfolio would be
while defensive investors may focus on low-beta investments.
return for a commission or asset-based fee. A ﬂoor broker handles buy and sell
orders on the ﬂoor of a securities or commodities exchange. A real estate broker
represents the seller in a real estate transaction and receives a commission on
the sale.
The buy side refers to ﬁrms that buy and sell as customers of these market
179The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives
by Rich ard C . Wilson
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 180 GLOSSARY
Calmar and Sterling ratios Calmar and Sterling ratios are well suited for presenting
the worst-case picture since they take into account maximum drawdown—that
capital introduction services This is a process whereby the prime broker attempts
to introduce its hedge fund clients to qualiﬁed hedge fund investors who have
an interest in exploring new opportunities to make hedge fund investments.
chief compliance ofﬁcer (CCO) A CCO is primarily responsible for overseeing
and managing compliance issues in an organization. The responsibilities ofthe position often include leading enterprise compliance efforts; designing and
guidelines; managing audits and investigations into regulatory and compliance
issues; and responding to requests for information from regulatory bodies.
clearing Clearing denotes all activities from the time a commitment is made for
presettlement credit exposures to ensure that trades are settled in accordance
settlement.
Commodities and Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) The Commodities and
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) is an independent agency of the U.S.
government. The main objectives of the CFTC are to protect market users and
and ﬁnancially sound futures and option markets.
custodian A custodian is a ﬁnancial institution responsible for safeguarding a ﬁrm’s
or individual’s ﬁnancial assets. The role of a custodian in such a case would be
activities to their clients.
dark pool Dark pools offer institutional investors liquidity that is not displayed
on order books. This is useful for traders who wish to move large numbers of
shares without revealing themselves to the open market.
dealer A dealer is an individual or a ﬁrm that buys assets for and sells assets from
marketplace and seeking to proﬁt from the spread between the prices at which
but they may tend to make recommendations based on their own ownership
positions.
drawdown A drawdown is measured from the time a retrenchment begins to when a
new high is reached. This method is used because a valley can’t be measured untilGlossary 181
the old high to the smallest trough is recorded. Drawdowns help determine
an investment’s ﬁnancial risk. An analyst can use this as a tool to compare asecurity’s possible reward to its risk.
client. The date of execution is known as the trade date.
at risk (VAR). The primary objective is to trade actively and manage liquidity.
fund administration services Fund administration services are a set of activities that
are carried out in support of the actual process of running a hedge fund. Services
of the fund.
fund of hedge funds A fund of hedge funds is an investment company that invests
in hedge funds rather than in individual securities. Some funds of hedge funds
register their securities with the SEC. These funds of hedge funds must provide
investors with a prospectus and must ﬁle certain reports quarterly with the SEC.
They hold a diversiﬁed portfolio of generally uncorrelated hedge funds that may
be widely diversiﬁed or focused on a speciﬁc sector or geographical location.
hedge fund Hedge funds pool the investors’ money and invest in ﬁnancial instru-
ments in order to make positive returns. They pursue absolute returns on their
underlying instruments. Every hedge fund has its own investment strategy that
determines the type of investments and the methods of investment it undertakes.
take speculative positions in derivative securities such as options and have the
ability to short-sell stocks. This will typically increase the leverage—and thus
the risk—of the fund. This also means that it’s possible for hedge funds to
make money when the market is falling. Hedge funds are only available to a
speciﬁc group of sophisticated investors with high net worth. The U.S. govern-
lengthy and restrictive.
high-water mark A hedge fund applies a high-water mark to an investor’s money;
this means that the manager will only receive performance fees on that particular
pool of invested money when its current value is greater than its previous greatest
above the previous greatest value before he can receive performance fees again.
hurdle rate The hurdle rate is an established minimum return that an investor’s
investment must earn to the application of performance/incentive fees.
kurtosis The scaled fourth power of observations in the tail distribution is kurto-
sis. The classical interpretation of kurtosis is that it measures both peakedness182 GLOSSARY
and tail heaviness of a distribution relative to that of the normal distribution.
the mean. It is also called the volatility of volatility.
leverage Leverage is the extent to which a fund is utilizing borrowed money.
A highly leveraged fund or company is considered a risky investment because it
make both gains and losses much more extreme than otherwise possible.
management fee The management fee is calculated as a percentage of a fund’s net
ﬁgure. This is the fee intended to compensate the managers for professionally
managing the investor’s assets.
omega The omega measure provides the information about benchmark returns that
is relevant in the tail of the distribution curve. Omega calculations involve a com-
and expresses it in a manner that is intuitive from an investment performance
viewpoint.
performance fee The performance fee or incentive fee is calculated as a percentage
the fund manager charges 20 percent of the returns as a performance fee.
prime brokerage This is a package of services offered by the investment banks
to the hedge funds. The advantage that a hedge fund enjoys is that the prime
the hedge fund’s collateral requirements are netted across all deals handled
by the prime broker. The prime broker in turn beneﬁts by earning fees on
redemptions Redemptions are withdrawals from hedge funds by investors which
risk budgeting Risk budgeting is the process of decomposing the aggregate risk of a
portfolio into its constituents on a quantitative basis; setting risk limits to each
with risk budgets; monitoring the use or abuse of risk budgets on an ongoing
basis; analyzing the results; and improving the investment process.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) The U.S. Securities and Exchange
efﬁcient markets; and to facilitate capital formation.
sell side Banks and brokers are the main constituents of the sell side. The term refers
to ﬁrms that take orders from buy side ﬁrms and then work the orders. Sell side
ﬁrms are paid through commissions charged on the sales price of the stock. Sell
do business.
Sharpe ratio The Sharpe ratio considers total risk and is more suitable for diversiﬁed
such as proportionality to the t-statistic (for returns in excess of zero) and
the centrality of the Sharpe ratio squared to optimal portfolio allocation. But
the ratio is leverage invariant and does not incorporate correlations and risksinvolving higher movements.
sale that is completed by the delivery of a security borrowed by the seller. Short-
sellers assume that they will be able to buy the stock at a lower amount than
the price at which they sold short. Short-sellers make money if the stock price
goes down.
soft dollar A soft dollar payment is a payment made by institutional investment
funds to their service providers. Usually soft dollars are incorporated into bro-
Sortino ratio The Sortino ratio adjusts by drawdown. The ratio does not consider
up movements in volatility but only underperformance and some threshold of
MAR. Sortino can look deceptively high/favorable (upon trend reversal) if the
downside deviation underestimates the two-sided risk if the estimation period
is not long enough to include loss periods.
standard deviation The standard deviation is often used by investors to measure
the risk of a stock or a stock portfolio. The basic idea is that the standard
deviation is a measure of volatility: The more a stock’s returns vary from the
managers by specialized marketing ﬁrms. Provided services may include the
and customer relations management. The role of third-party marketing ﬁrms is
to serve as a bridge between fund managers and potential investors. Third-party
marketing ﬁrms can offer recommendations; contact assistance; and compar-
structures.
""
