Credit risk management
1Principles for the Management of Credit Risk
I. Introduction
1. While financial institutions have faced difficulties over the years for a multitude of
reasons, the major cause of serious banking problems continues to be directly related to lax
credit standards for borrowers and counterparties, poor portfolio risk management, or a lack
of attention to changes in economic or other circumstances that can lead to a deterioration inthe credit standing of a bank’s counterparties. This experience is common in both G-10 and
non-G-10 countries.
2. Credit risk is most simply defined as the potential that a bank borrower or
counterparty will fail to meet its obligations in accordance with agreed terms. The goal of
credit risk management is to maximise a bank’s risk-adjusted rate of return by maintaining
credit risk exposure within acceptable parameters. Banks need to manage the credit risk
inherent in the entire portfolio as well as the risk in individual credits or transactions. Banks
should also consider the relationships between credit risk and other risks. The effective
management of credit risk is a critical component of a comprehensive approach to risk
management and essential to the long-term success of any banking organisation.
3. For most banks, loans are the largest and most obvious source of credit risk;
however, other sources of credit risk exist throughout the activities of a bank, including in the
banking book and in the trading book, and both on and off the balance sheet. Banks are
increasingly facing credit risk (or counterparty risk) in various financial instruments other
than loans, including acceptances, interbank transactions, trade financing, foreign exchange
transactions, financial futures, swaps, bonds, equities, options, and in the extension of
commitments and guarantees, and the settlement of transactions.
4. Since exposure to credit risk continues to be the leading source of problems in banks
world-wide, banks and their supervisors should be able to draw useful lessons from past
experiences. Banks should now have a keen awareness of the need to identify, measure,
monitor and control credit risk as well as to determine that they hold adequate capital against
these risks and that they are adequately compensated for risks incurred. The Basel Committee
is issuing this document in order to encourage banking supervisors globally to promote sound
practices for managing credit risk. Although the principles contained in this paper are mostCredit risk management
2clearly applicable to the business of lending, they should be applied to all activities where
credit risk is present.
5. The sound practices set out in this document specifically address the following areas:
(i) establishing an appropriate credit risk environment; (ii) operating under a sound credit-
granting process; (iii) maintaining an appropriate credit administration, measurement and
monitoring process; and (iv) ensuring adequate controls over credit risk. Although specific
credit risk management practices may differ among banks depending upon the nature and
complexity of their credit activities, a comprehensive credit risk management program will
address these four areas. These practices should also be applied in conjunction with sound
practices related to the assessment of asset quality, the adequacy of provisions and reserves,
and the disclosure of credit risk, all of which have been addressed in other recent Basel
Committee documents.1
6. While the exact approach chosen by individual supervisors will depend on a host offactors, including their on-site and off-site supervisory techniques and the degree to which
external auditors are also used in the supervisory function, all members of the Basel
Committee agree that the principles set out in this paper should be used in evaluating a
bank’s credit risk management system . Supervisory expectations for the credit risk
management approach used by individual banks should be commensurate with the scope and
sophistication of the bank’s activities. For smaller or less sophisticated banks, supervisors
need to determine that the credit risk management approach used is sufficient for their
activities and that they have instilled sufficient risk-return discipline in their credit risk
management processes. The Committee stipulates in Sections II to VI of the paper, principles
for banking supervisory authorities to apply in assessing bank’s credit risk managementsystems. In addition, the appendix provides an overview of credit problems commonly seen
by supervisors.
7. A further particular instance of credit risk relates to the process of settling financial
transactions. If one side of a transaction is settled but the other fails, a loss may be incurred
that is equal to the principal amount of the transaction. Even if one party is simply late in
settling, then the other party may incur a loss relating to missed investment opportunities.
Settlement risk (i.e. the risk that the completion or settlement of a financial transaction will
fail to take place as expected) thus includes elements of liquidity, market, operational and
1See in particular Sound Practices for Loan Accounting and Disclosure  (July 1999) and Best Practices for Credit Risk
Disclosure  (September 2000).Credit risk management
3reputational risk as well as credit risk. The level of risk is determined by the particular
arrangements for settlement. Factors in such arrangements that have a bearing on credit risk
include: the timing of the exchange of value; payment/settlement finality; and the role of
intermediaries and clearing houses.2
8. This paper was originally published for consultation in July 1999.  The Committee isgrateful to the central banks, supervisory authorities, banking associations, and institutions
that provided comments.  These comments have informed the production of this final version
of the paper.
2See in particular Supervisory Guidance for Managing Settlement Risk in Foreign Exchange Transactions  (September
2000), in which the annotated bibliography (annex 3) provides a list of publications related to various settlement risks.Credit risk management
4Principles for the Assessment of Banks’ Management of Credit Risk
A. Establishing an appropriate credit risk environment
Principle 1: The board of directors should have responsibility for approving and
periodically (at least annually) reviewing the credit risk strategy and significant credit
risk policies of the bank. The strategy should reflect the bank’s tolerance for risk andthe level of profitability the bank expects to achieve for incurring various credit risks.
Principle 2: Senior management should have responsibility for implementing the credit
risk strategy approved by the board of directors and for developing policies and
procedures for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling credit risk. Such
policies and procedures should address credit risk in all of the bank’s activities and at
both the individual credit and portfolio levels.
Principle 3: Banks should identify and manage credit risk inherent in all products and
activities. Banks should ensure that the risks of products and activities new to them are
subject to adequate risk management procedures and controls before being introduced
or undertaken, and approved in advance by the board of directors or its appropriate
committee.
B. Operating under a sound credit granting process
Principle 4: Banks must operate within sound, well-defined credit-granting criteria.
These criteria should include a clear indication of the bank’s target market and a
thorough understanding of the borrower or counterparty, as well as the purpose and
structure of the credit, and its source of repayment.
Principle 5: Banks should establish overall credit limits at the level of individual
borrowers and counterparties, and groups of connected counterparties that aggregate in
a comparable and meaningful manner different types of exposures, both in the banking
and trading book and on and off the balance sheet.
Principle 6: Banks should have a clearly-established process in place for approving new
credits as well as the amendment, renewal and re-financing of existing credits.Credit risk management
5Principle 7: All extensions of credit must be made on an arm’s-length basis. In
particular, credits to related companies and individuals must be authorised on an
exception basis, monitored with particular care and other appropriate steps taken to
control or mitigate the risks of non-arm’s length lending.
C. Maintaining an appropriate credit administration, measurement and
monitoring process
Principle 8: Banks should have in place a system for the ongoing administration of their
various credit risk-bearing portfolios.
Principle 9: Banks must have in place a system for monitoring the condition of
individual credits, including determining the adequacy of provisions and reserves.
Principle 10: Banks are encouraged to develop and utilise an internal risk rating system
in managing credit risk. The rating system should be consistent with the nature, size and
complexity of a bank’s activities.
Principle 11: Banks must have information systems and analytical techniques that
enable management to measure the credit risk inherent in all on- and off-balance sheet
activities. The management information system should provide adequate information on
the composition of the credit portfolio, including identification of any concentrations of
risk.
Principle 12: Banks must have in place a system for monitoring the overall composition
and quality of the credit portfolio.
Principle 13: Banks should take into consideration potential future changes in economic
conditions when assessing individual credits and their credit portfolios, and should
assess their credit risk exposures under stressful conditions.
D. Ensuring adequate controls over credit risk
Principle 14: Banks must establish a system of independent, ongoing assessment of the
bank’s credit risk management processes and the results of such reviews should be
communicated directly to the board of directors and senior management.Credit risk management
6Principle 15: Banks must ensure that the credit-granting function is being properly
managed and that credit exposures are within levels consistent with prudential
standards and internal limits. Banks should establish and enforce internal controls and
other practices to ensure that exceptions to policies, procedures and limits are reported
in a timely manner to the appropriate level of management for action.
Principle 16: Banks must have a system in place for early remedial action on
deteriorating credits, managing problem credits and similar workout situations.
E. The role of supervisors
Principle 17: Supervisors should require that banks have an effective system in place to
identify, measure, monitor and control credit risk as part of an overall approach to risk
management. Supervisors should conduct an independent evaluation of a bank’s
strategies, policies, procedures and practices related to the granting of credit and the
ongoing management of the portfolio. Supervisors should consider setting prudential
limits to restrict bank exposures to single borrowers or groups of connected
counterparties.
II. Establishing an Appropriate Credit Risk Environment
Principle 1: The board of directors should have responsibility for approving andperiodically (at least annually) reviewing the credit risk strategy and significant credit
risk policies of the bank. The strategy should reflect the bank’s tolerance for risk and
the level of profitability the bank expects to achieve for incurring various credit risks.
9. As with all other areas of a bank’s activities, the board of directors
3 has a critical role
to play in overseeing the credit-granting and credit risk management functions of the bank.
3This paper refers to a management structure composed of a board of directors and senior management. The Committee is
aware that there are significant differences in legislative and regulatory frameworks across countries as regards the
functions of the board of directors and senior management. In some countries, the board has the main, if not exclusive,function of supervising the executive body (senior management, general management) so as to ensure that the latterfulfils its tasks. For this reason, in some cases, it is known as a supervisory board. This means that the board has no
executive functions. In other countries, by contrast, the board has a broader competence in that it lays down the general
framework for the management of the bank. Owing to these differences, the notions of the board of directors and seniormanagement are used in this paper not to identify legal constructs but rather to label two decision-making functionswithin a bank.Credit risk management
7Each bank should develop a credit risk strategy or plan that establishes the objectives guiding
the bank’s credit-granting activities and adopt the necessary policies and procedures for
conducting such activities. The credit risk strategy, as well as significant credit risk policies,
should be approved and periodically (at least annually) reviewed by the board of directors.
The board needs to recognise that the strategy and policies must cover the many activities of
the bank in which credit exposure is a significant risk.
10. The strategy should include a statement of the bank’s willingness to grant credit
based on exposure type (for example, commercial, consumer, real estate), economic sector,
geographical location, currency, maturity and anticipated profitability. This might also include
the identification of target markets and the overall characteristics that the bank would want to
achieve in its credit portfolio (including levels of diversification and concentration
tolerances).
11. The credit risk strategy should give recognition to the goals of credit quality,
earnings and growth. Every bank, regardless of size, is in business to be profitable and,
consequently, must determine the acceptable risk/reward trade-off for its activities, factoring
in the cost of capital. A bank’s board of directors should approve the bank’s strategy for
selecting risks and maximising profits. The board should periodically review the financial
results of the bank and, based on these results, determine if changes need to be made to the
strategy. The board must also determine that the bank’s capital level is adequate for the risks
assumed throughout the entire organisation.
12. The credit risk strategy of any bank should provide continuity in approach.
Therefore, the strategy will need to take into account the cyclical aspects of any economy and
the resulting shifts in the composition and quality of the overall credit portfolio. Although thestrategy should be periodically assessed and amended, it should be viable in the long-run and
through various economic cycles.
13. The credit risk strategy and policies should be effectively communicated throughout
the banking organisation. All relevant personnel should clearly understand the bank’s
approach to granting and managing credit and should be held accountable for complying with
established policies and procedures.
14. The board should ensure that senior management is fully capable of managing the
credit activities conducted by the bank and that such activities are done within the risk
strategy, policies and tolerances approved by the board. The board should also regularly (i.e.
at least annually), either within the credit risk strategy or within a statement of credit policy,
approve the bank’s overall credit granting criteria (including general terms and conditions). InCredit risk management
8addition, it should approve the manner in which the bank will organise its credit-granting
functions, including independent review of the credit granting and management function and
the overall portfolio.
15. While members of the board of directors, particularly outside directors, can be
important sources of new business for the bank, once a potential credit is introduced, the
bank’s established processes should determine how much and at what terms credit is granted.
In order to avoid conflicts of interest, it is important that board members not override the
credit-granting and monitoring processes of the bank.
16. The board of directors should ensure that the bank’s remuneration policies do not
contradict its credit risk strategy. Remuneration policies that reward unacceptable behaviour
such as generating short-term profits while deviating from credit policies or exceeding
established limits, weaken the bank’s credit processes.
Principle 2: Senior management should have responsibility for implementing the credit
risk strategy approved by the board of directors and for developing policies and
procedures for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling credit risk. Such
policies and procedures should address credit risk in all of the bank’s activities and at
both the individual credit and portfolio levels.
17. Senior management of a bank is responsible for implementing the credit risk strategy
approved by the board of directors. This includes ensuring that the bank’s credit-granting
activities conform to the established strategy, that written procedures are developed and
implemented, and that loan approval and review responsibilities are clearly and properly
assigned. Senior management must also ensure that there is a periodic independent internal
assessment of the bank’s credit-granting and management functions.4
18. A cornerstone of safe and sound banking is the design and implementation of written
policies and procedures related to identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling credit
risk. Credit policies establish the framework for lending and guide the credit-granting
activities of the bank. Credit policies should address such topics as target markets, portfolio
mix, price and non-price terms, the structure of limits, approval authorities, exception
procesing/reporting, etc. Such policies should be clearly defined, consistent with prudent
banking practices and relevant regulatory requirements, and adequate for the nature and
4This may be difficult for very small banks; however, there should be adequate checks and balances in pl ace to promote
sound credit decisions.Credit risk management
9complexity of the bank’s activities. The policies should be designed and implemented within
the context of internal and external factors such as the bank’s market position, trade area, staff
capabilities and technology. Policies and procedures that are properly developed and
implemented enable the bank to: (i) maintain sound credit-granting standards; (ii) monitor and
control credit risk; (iii) properly evaluate new business opportunities; and (iv) identify and
administer problem credits.
19. As discussed further in paragraphs 30 and 37 through 41 below, banks should
develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure that the credit portfolio is
adequately diversified given the bank’s target markets and overall credit strategy. In
particular, such policies should establish targets for portfolio mix as well as set exposure
limits on single counterparties and groups of connected counterparties, particular industries or
economic sectors, geographic regions and specific products. Banks should ensure that their
own internal exposure limits comply with any prudential limits or restrictions set by the
banking supervisors.
20. In order to be effective, credit policies must be communicated throughout the
organisation, implemented through appropriate procedures, monitored and periodically
revised to take into account changing internal and external circumstances. They should be
applied, where appropriate, on a consolidated bank basis and at the level of individual
affiliates. In addition, the policies should address equally the important functions of reviewing
credits on an individual basis and ensuring appropriate diversification at the portfolio level.
21. When banks engage in granting credit internationally, they undertake, in addition to
standard credit risk, risk associated with conditions in the home country of a foreign borrower
or counterparty. Country or sovereign risk encompasses the entire spectrum of risks arisingfrom the economic, political and social environments of a foreign country that may have
potential consequences for foreigners’ debt and equity investments in that country. Transfer
risk focuses more specifically on a borrower’s capacity to obtain the foreign exchange
necessary to service its cross-border debt and other contractual obligations. In all instances of
international transactions, banks need to understand the globalisation of financial markets and
the potential for spillover effects from one country to another or contagion effects for an
entire region.
22. Banks that engage in granting credit internationally must therefore have adequate
policies and procedures for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling country risk
and transfer risk in their international lending and investment activities. The monitoring of
country risk factors should incorporate (i) the potential default of foreign private sectorCredit risk management
10counterparties arising from country-specific economic factors and (ii) the enforceability of
loan agreements and the timing and ability to realise collateral under the national legal
framework. This function is often the responsibility of a specialist team familiar with the
particular issues.
Principle 3: Banks should identify and manage credit risk inherent in all products and
activities. Banks should ensure that the risks of products and activities new to them are
subject to adequate risk management procedures and controls before being introduced
or undertaken, and approved in advance by the board of directors or its appropriate
committee.
23. The basis for an effective credit risk management process is the identification and
analysis of existing and potential risks inherent in any product or activity. Consequently, it is
important that banks identify all credit risk inherent in the products they offer and the
activities in which they engage. Such identification stems from a careful review of the
existing and potential credit risk characteristics of the product or activity.
24. Banks must develop a clear understanding of the credit risks involved in more
complex credit-granting activities (for example, loans to certain industry sectors, asset
securitisation, customer-written options, credit derivatives, credit-linked notes). This is
particularly important because the credit risk involved, while not new to banking, may be less
obvious and require more analysis than the risk of more traditional credit-granting activities.
Although more complex credit-granting activities may require tailored procedures and
controls, the basic principles of credit risk management will still apply.
25. New ventures require significant planning and careful oversight to ensure the risks
are appropriately identified and managed. Banks should ensure that the risks of new productsand activities are subject to adequate procedures and controls before being introduced or
undertaken. Any major new activity should be approved in advance by the board of directors
or its appropriate delegated committee.
26. It is critical that senior management determine that the staff involved in any activity
where there is borrower or counterparty credit risk, whether established or new, basic or more
complex, be fully capable of conducting the activity to the highest standards and in
compliance with the bank’s policies and procedures.Credit risk management
11III. Operating under a Sound Credit Granting Process
Principle 4: Banks must operate within sound, well-defined credit-granting criteria.
These criteria should include a clear indication of the bank’s target market and a
thorough understanding of the borrower or counterparty, as well as the purpose and
structure of the credit, and its source of repayment.
27. Establishing sound, well-defined credit-granting criteria is essential to approving
credit in a safe and sound manner. The criteria should set out who is eligible for credit and for
how much, what types of credit are available, and under what terms and conditions the credits
should be granted.
28. Banks must receive sufficient information to enable a comprehensive assessment of
the true risk profile of the borrower or counterparty. Depending on the type of credit exposure
and the nature of the credit relationship to date, the factors to be considered and documented
in approving credits include:
• the purpose of the credit and sources of repayment;
• the current risk profile (including the nature and aggregate amounts of risks) of the
borrower or counterparty and collateral and its sensitivity to economic and market
developments;
• the borrower’s repayment history and current capacity to repay, based on historical
financial trends and future cash flow projections, under various scenarios;
• for commercial credits, the borrower’s business expertise and the status of the
borrower’s economic sector and its position within that sector;
• the proposed terms and conditions of the credit, including covenants designed to
limit changes in the future risk profile of the borrower; and
• where applicable, the adequacy and enforceability of collateral or guarantees,
including under various scenarios.
In addition, in approving borrowers or counterparties for the first time, consideration should
be given to the integrity and reputation of the borrower or counterparty as well as their legal
capacity to assume the liability. Once credit-granting criteria have been established, it is
essential for the bank to ensure that the information it receives is sufficient to make proper
credit-granting decisions. This information will also serve as the basis for rating the credit
under the bank’s internal rating system.Credit risk management
1229. Banks need to understand to whom they are granting credit. Therefore, prior to
entering into any new credit relationship, a bank must become familiar with the borrower or
counterparty and be confident that they are dealing with an individual or organisation of
sound repute and creditworthiness. In particular, strict policies must be in place to avoid
association with individuals involved in fraudulent activities and other crimes. This can be
achieved through a number of ways, including asking for references from known parties,
accessing credit registries, and becoming familiar with individuals responsible for managing a
company and checking their personal references and financial condition. However, a bank
should not grant credit simply because the borrower or counterparty is familiar to the bank or
is perceived to be highly reputable.
30. Banks should have procedures to identify situations where, in considering credits, it
is appropriate to classify a group of obligors as connected counterparties and, thus, as a single
obligor. This would include aggregating exposures to groups of accounts exhibiting financial
interdependence, including corporate or non-corporate, where they are under common
ownership or control or with strong connecting links (for example, common management,
familial ties).5 Banks should also have procedures for aggregating exposures to individual
clients across business activities.
31. Many banks participate in loan syndications or other such loan consortia. Some
institutions place undue reliance on the credit risk analysis done by the lead underwriter or on
external commercial loan credit ratings. All syndicate participants should perform their own
due diligence, including independent credit risk analysis and review of syndicate terms prior
to committing to the syndication. Each bank should analyse the risk and return on syndicated
loans in the same manner as directly sourced loans.32. Granting credit involves accepting risks as well as producing profits. Banks should
assess the risk/reward relationship in any credit as well as the overall profitability of the
account relationship. In evaluating whether, and on what terms, to grant credit, banks need to
assess the risks against expected return, factoring in, to the greatest extent possible, price and
non-price (e.g. collateral, restrictive covenants, etc.) terms. In evaluating risk, banks should
also assess likely downside scenarios and their possible impact on borrowers or
counterparties. A common problem among banks is the tendency not to price a credit or
5Connected counterparties may be a group of companies related financially or by common ownership, management,
research and development, marketing or any combination thereof. Identification of connected counterparties requires a
careful analysis of the impact of these factors on the financial interdependency of the parties involved.Credit risk management
13overall relationship properly and therefore not receive adequate compensation for the risks
incurred.
33. In considering potential credits, banks must recognise the necessity of establishing
provisions for identified and expected losses and holding adequate capital to absorb
unexpected losses. The bank should factor these considerations into credit-granting decisions,
as well as into the overall portfolio risk management process.6
34. Banks can utilise transaction structure, collateral and guarantees to help mitigaterisks (both identified and inherent) in individual credits but transactions should be entered into
primarily on the strength of the borrower’s repayment capacity. Collateral cannot be a
substitute for a comprehensive assessment of the borrower or counterparty, nor can it
compensate for insufficient information. It should be recognised that any credit enforcement
actions (e.g. foreclosure proceedings) can eliminate the profit margin on the transaction. In
addition, banks need to be mindful that the value of collateral may well be impaired by the
same factors that have led to the diminished recoverability of the credit. Banks should have
policies covering the acceptability of various forms of collateral, procedures for the ongoing
valuation of such collateral, and a process to ensure that collateral is, and continues to be,
enforceable and realisable. With regard to guarantees, banks should evaluate the level of
coverage being provided in relation to the credit-quality and legal capacity of the guarantor.
Banks should be careful when making assumptions about implied support from third parties
such as the government.
35. Netting agreements are an important way to reduce credit risks, especially in
interbank transactions. In order to actually reduce risk, such agreements need to be sound and
legally enforceable.
7
36. Where actual or potential conflicts of interest exist within the bank, internal
confidentiality arrangements (e.g. “Chinese walls”) should be established to ensure that there
is no hindrance to the bank obtaining all relevant information from the borrower.
Principle 5: Banks should establish overall credit limits at the level of individual
borrowers and counterparties, and groups of connected counterparties that aggregate in
6Guidance on loan classification and provisioning is available in the document Sound Practices for Loan Accounting and
Disclosure (July 1999).
7Guidance on netting arrangements is available in the document Consultative paper on on-balance sheet netting  (April
1998).Credit risk management
14a comparable and meaningful manner different types of exposures, both in the banking
and trading book and on and off the balance sheet.
37. An important element of credit risk management is the establishment of exposure
limits on single counterparties and groups of connected counterparties. Such limits are
frequently based in part on the internal risk rating assigned to the borrower or counterparty,
with counterparties assigned better risk ratings having potentially higher exposure limits.
Limits should also be established for particular industries or economic sectors, geographic
regions and specific products.
38. Exposure limits are needed in all areas of the bank’s activities that involve credit
risk. These limits help to ensure that the bank’s credit-granting activities are adequately
diversified. As mentioned earlier, much of the credit exposure faced by some banks comes
from activities and instruments in the trading book and off the balance sheet. Limits on such
transactions are particularly effective in managing the overall credit risk profile or
counterparty risk of a bank. In order to be effective, limits should generally be binding and
not driven by customer demand.
39. Effective measures of potential future exposure are essential for the establishment of
meaningful limits, placing an upper bound on the overall scale of activity with, and exposure
to, a given counterparty, based on a comparable measure of exposure across a bank’s various
activities (both on and off-balance-sheet).
40. Banks should consider the results of stress testing in the overall limit setting and
monitoring process. Such stress testing should take into consideration economic cycles,
interest rate and other market movements, and liquidity conditions.
41. Bank’s credit limits should recognise and reflect the risks associated with the near-term liquidation of positions in the event of counterparty default.
8 Where a bank has several
transactions with a counterparty, its potential exposure to that counterparty is likely to vary
significantly and discontinuously over the maturity over which it is calculated. Potential
future exposures should therefore be calculated over multiple time horizons. Limits should
also factor in any unsecured exposure in a liquidation scenario.
Principle 6: Banks should have a clearly-established process in place for approving new
credits as well as the amendment, renewal and re-financing of existing credits.
8Guidance is available in the documents Banks’ Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions  and Sound Practices for
Banks’ Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions  (January 1999).Credit risk management
1542. Many individuals within a bank are involved in the credit-granting process. These
include individuals from the business origination function, the credit analysis function and the
credit approval function. In addition, the same counterparty may be approaching several
different areas of the bank for various forms of credit. Banks may choose to assign
responsibilities in different ways; however, it is important that the credit granting process
coordinate the efforts of all of the various individuals in order to ensure that sound credit
decisions are made.
43. In order to maintain a sound credit portfolio, a bank must have an established formal
transaction evaluation and approval process for the granting of credits. Approvals should be
made in accordance with the bank’s written guidelines and granted by the appropriate level of
management. There should be a clear audit trail documenting that the approval process was
complied with and identifying the individual(s) and/or committee(s) providing input as well
as making the credit decision. Banks often benefit from the establishment of specialist credit
groups to analyse and approve credits related to significant product lines, types of credit
facilities and industrial and geographic sectors. Banks should invest in adequate credit
decision resources so that they are able to make sound credit decisions consistent with their
credit strategy and meet competitive time, pricing and structuring pressures.
44. Each credit proposal should be subject to careful analysis by a qualified credit
analyst with expertise commensurate with the size and complexity of the transaction. An
effective evaluation process establishes minimum requirements for the information on which
the analysis is to be based. There should be policies in place regarding the information and
documentation needed to approve new credits, renew existing credits and/or change the terms
and conditions of previously approved credits. The information received will be the basis forany internal evaluation or rating assigned to the credit and its accuracy and adequacy is
critical to management making appropriate judgements about the acceptability of the credit.
45. Banks must develop a corps of credit risk officers who have the experience,
knowledge and background to exercise prudent judgement in assessing, approving and
managing credit risks. A bank’s credit-granting approval process should establish
accountability for decisions taken and designate who has the absolute authority to approve
credits or changes in credit terms. Banks typically utilise a combination of individual
signature authority, dual or joint authorities, and a credit approval group or committee,
depending upon the size and nature of the credit. Approval authorities should be
commensurate with the expertise of the individuals involved.Credit risk management
16Principle 7: All extensions of credit must be made on an arm’s-length basis. In
particular, credits to related companies and individuals must be authorised on an
exception basis, monitored with particular care and other appropriate steps taken to
control or mitigate the risks of non-arm’s length lending.
46. Extensions of credit should be made subject to the criteria and processes described
above. These create a system of checks and balances that promote sound credit decisions.
Therefore, directors, senior management and other influential parties (e.g. shareholders)
should not seek to override the established credit-granting and monitoring processes of the
bank.
47. A potential area of abuse arises from granting credit to non-arms-length and related
parties, whether companies or individuals.9 Consequently, it is important that banks grant
credit to such parties on an arm’s-length basis and that the amount of credit granted is suitably
monitored. Such controls are most easily implemented by requiring that the terms and
conditions of such credits not be more favourable than credit granted to non-related borrowers
under similar circumstances and by imposing strict absolute limits on such credits. Another
possible method of control is the public disclosure of the terms of credits granted to related
parties. The bank’s credit-granting criteria should not be altered to accommodate related
companies and individuals.
48. Material transactions with related parties should be subject to the approval of the
board of directors (excluding board members with conflicts of interest), and in certain
circumstances (e.g. a large loan to a major shareholder) reported to the banking supervisory
authorities.
IV. Maintaining an Appropriate Credit Administration, Measurement
and Monitoring Process
Principle 8: Banks should have in place a system for the ongoing administration of their
various credit risk-bearing portfolios.
9Related parties can include the bank’s subsidiaries and affiliates, its major shareholders, directors and senior
management, and their direct and related interests, as well as any party that the bank exerts control over or that exerts
control over the bank.Credit risk management
1749. Credit administration is a critical element in maintaining the safety and soundness of
a bank. Once a credit is granted, it is the responsibility of the business unit, often in
conjunction with a credit administration support team, to ensure that the credit is properly
maintained. This includes keeping the credit file up to date, obtaining current financial
information, sending out renewal notices and preparing various documents such as loan
agreements.
50. Given the wide range of responsibilities of the credit administration function, its
organisational structure varies with the size and sophistication of the bank. In larger banks,
responsibilities for the various components of credit administration are usually assigned to
different departments. In smaller banks, a few individuals might handle several of the
functional areas. Where individuals perform such sensitive functions as custody of key
documents, wiring out funds, or entering limits into the computer database, they should report
to managers who are independent of the business origination and credit approval processes.
51. In developing their credit administration areas, banks should ensure:
• the efficiency and effectiveness of credit administration operations, including
monitoring documentation, contractual requirements, legal covenants, collateral, etc.;
• the accuracy and timeliness of information provided to management information
systems;
• adequate segregation of duties;
• the adequacy of controls over all “back office” procedures; and
• compliance with prescribed management policies and procedures as well as
applicable laws and regulations.
52. For the various components of credit administration to function appropriately, senior
management must understand and demonstrate that it recognises the importance of this
element of monitoring and controlling credit risk.
53. The credit files should include all of the information necessary to ascertain the
current financial condition of the borrower or counterparty as well as sufficient information to
track the decisions made and the history of the credit. For example, the credit files should
include current financial statements, financial analyses and internal rating documentation,
internal memoranda, reference letters, and appraisals. The loan review function should
determine that the credit files are complete and that all loan approvals and other necessary
documents have been obtained.Credit risk management
18Principle 9: Banks must have in place a system for monitoring the condition of
individual credits, including determining the adequacy of provisions and reserves.
54. Banks need to develop and implement comprehensive procedures and information
systems to monitor the condition of individual credits and single obligors across the bank’s
various portfolios. These procedures need to define criteria for identifying and reporting
potential problem credits and other transactions to ensure that they are subject to more
frequent monitoring as well as possible corrective action, classification and/or provisioning.10
55. An effective credit monitoring system will include measures to:
• ensure that the bank understands the current financial condition of the borrower or
counterparty;
• monitor compliance with existing covenants;
• assess, where applicable, collateral coverage relative to the obligor’s current
condition;
• identify contractual payment delinquencies and classify potential problem credits on
a timely basis; and
• direct promptly problems for remedial management.
56. Specific individuals should be responsible for monitoring credit quality, including
ensuring that relevant information is passed to those responsible for assigning internal risk
ratings to the credit. In addition, individuals should be made responsible for monitoring on an
ongoing basis any underlying collateral and guarantees. Such monitoring will assist the bank
in making necessary changes to contractual arrangements as well as maintaining adequate
reserves for credit losses. In assigning these responsibilities, bank management should
recognise the potential for conflicts of interest, especially for personnel who are judged and
rewarded on such indicators as loan volume, portfolio quality or short-term profitability.
Principle 10: Banks are encouraged to develop and utilise an internal risk rating system
in managing credit risk. The rating system should be consistent with the nature, size and
complexity of a bank’s activities.
57. An important tool in monitoring the quality of individual credits, as well as the total
portfolio, is the use of an internal risk rating system. A well-structured internal risk rating
system is a good means of differentiating the degree of credit risk in the different credit
10See footnote 6.Credit risk management
19exposures of a bank. This will allow more accurate determination of the overall characteristics
of the credit portfolio, concentrations, problem credits, and the adequacy of loan loss reserves.
More detailed and sophisticated internal risk rating systems, used primarily at larger banks,
can also be used to determine internal capital allocation, pricing of credits, and profitability of
transactions and relationships.
58. Typically, an internal risk rating system categorises credits into various classes
designed to take into account gradations in risk. Simpler systems might be based on several
categories ranging from satisfactory to unsatisfactory; however, more meaningful systems
will have numerous gradations for credits considered satisfactory in order to truly differentiate
the relative credit risk they pose. In developing their systems, banks must decide whether to
rate the riskiness of the borrower or counterparty, the risks associated with a specific
transaction, or both.
59. Internal risk ratings are an important tool in monitoring and controlling credit risk. In
order to facilitate early identification of changes in risk profiles, the bank’s internal risk rating
system should be responsive to indicators of potential or actual deterioration in credit risk.
Credits with deteriorating ratings should be subject to additional oversight and monitoring, for
example, through more frequent visits from credit officers and inclusion on a watchlist that is
regularly reviewed by senior management. The internal risk ratings can be used by line
management in different departments to track the current characteristics of the credit portfolio
and help determine necessary changes to the credit strategy of the bank. Consequently, it is
important that the board of directors and senior management also receive periodic reports on
the condition of the credit portfolios based on such ratings.
60. The ratings assigned to individual borrowers or counterparties at the time the credit isgranted must be reviewed on a periodic basis and individual credits should be assigned a new
rating when conditions either improve or deteriorate. Because of the importance of ensuring
that internal ratings are consistent and accurately reflect the quality of individual credits,
responsibility for setting or confirming such ratings should rest with a credit review function
independent of that which originated the credit concerned. It is also important that the
consistency and accuracy of ratings is examined periodically by a function such as an
independent credit review group.
Principle 11: Banks must have information systems and analytical techniques that
enable management to measure the credit risk inherent in all on- and off-balance sheet
activities. The management information system should provide adequate information onCredit risk management
20the composition of the credit portfolio, including identification of any concentrations of
risk.
61. Banks should have methodologies that enable them to quantify the risk involved in
exposures to individual borrowers or counterparties. Banks should also be able to analyse
credit risk at the product and portfolio level in order to identify any particular sensitivities or
concentrations. The measurement of credit risk should take account of (i) the specific nature
of the credit (loan, derivative, facility, etc.) and its contractual and financial conditions
(maturity, reference rate, etc.); (ii) the exposure profile until maturity in relation to potential
market movements; (iii) the existence of collateral or guarantees; and (iv) the potential for
default based on the internal risk rating. The analysis of credit risk data should be undertaken
at an appropriate frequency with the results reviewed against relevant limits. Banks should
use measurement techniques that are appropriate to the complexity and level of the risks
involved in their activities, based on robust data, and subject to periodic validation.
62. The effectiveness of a bank’s credit risk measurement process is highly dependent on
the quality of management information systems. The information generated from such
systems enables the board and all levels of management to fulfil their respective oversight
roles, including determining the adequate level of capital that the bank should be holding.
Therefore, the quality, detail and timeliness of information are critical. In particular,
information on the composition and quality of the various portfolios, including on a
consolidated bank basis, should permit management to assess quickly and accurately the level
of credit risk that the bank has incurred through its various activities and determine whether
the bank’s performance is meeting the credit risk strategy.
63. Banks should monitor actual exposures against established limits. It is important thatbanks have a management information system in place to ensure that exposures approaching
risk limits are brought to the attention of senior management. All exposures should be
included in a risk limit measurement system. The bank’s information system should be able to
aggregate credit exposures to individual borrowers and counterparties and report on
exceptions to credit risk limits on a meaningful and timely basis.
64. Banks should have information systems in place that enable management to identify
any concentrations of risk within the credit portfolio. The adequacy of scope of information
should be reviewed on a periodic basis by business line managers and senior management to
ensure that it is sufficient to the complexity of the business. Increasingly, banks are alsoCredit risk management
21designing information systems that permit additional analysis of the credit portfolio, including
stress testing.
Principle 12: Banks must have in place a system for monitoring the overall composition
and quality of the credit portfolio.
65. Traditionally, banks have focused on oversight of contractual performance of
individual credits in managing their overall credit risk. While this focus is important, banks
also need to have in place a system for monitoring the overall composition and quality of the
various credit portfolios. This system should be consistent with the nature, size and
complexity of the bank's portfolios.
66. A continuing source of credit-related problems in banks is concentrations within the
credit portfolio. Concentrations of risk can take many forms and can arise whenever a
significant number of credits have similar risk characteristics. Concentrations occur when,
among other things, a bank’s portfolio contains a high level of direct or indirect credits to (i) a
single counterparty, (ii) a group of connected counterparties11, (iii) a particular industry or
economic sector, (iv) a geographic region, (v) an individual foreign country or a group of
countries whose economies are strongly interrelated, (vi) a type of credit facility, or (vii) a
type of collateral. Concentrations also occur in credits with the same maturity. Concentrations
can stem from more complex or subtle linkages among credits in the portfolio. The
concentration of risk does not only apply to the granting of loans but to the whole range of
banking activities that, by their nature, involve counterparty risk. A high level of
concentration exposes the bank to adverse changes in the area in which the credits are
concentrated.
67. In many instances, due to a bank’s trade area, geographic location or lack of accessto economically diverse borrowers or counterparties, avoiding or reducing concentrations may
be extremely difficult. In addition, banks may want to capitalise on their expertise in a
particular industry or economic sector. A bank may also determine that it is being adequately
compensated for incurring certain concentrations of risk. Consequently, banks should not
necessarily forego booking sound credits solely on the basis of concentration. Banks may
need to make use of alternatives to reduce or mitigate concentrations. Such measures can
include pricing for the additional risk, increased holdings of capital to compensate for the
additional risks and making use of loan participations in order to reduce dependency on a
11See footnote 5.Credit risk management
22particular sector of the economy or group of related borrowers. Banks must be careful not to
enter into transactions with borrowers or counterparties they do not know or engage in credit
activities they do not fully understand simply for the sake of diversification.
68. Banks have new possibilities to manage credit concentrations and other portfolio
issues. These include such mechanisms as loan sales, credit derivatives, securitisation
programs and other secondary loan markets. However, mechanisms to deal with portfolio
concentration issues involve risks that must also be identified and managed. Consequently,
when banks decide to utilise these mechanisms, they need to first have policies and
procedures, as well as adequate controls, in place.
Principle 13: Banks should take into consideration potential future changes in economic
conditions when assessing individual credits and their credit portfolios, and should
assess their credit risk exposures under stressful conditions.
69. An important element of sound credit risk management involves discussing what
could potentially go wrong with individual credits and within the various credit portfolios,
and factoring this information into the analysis of the adequacy of capital and provisions. This
“what if” exercise can reveal previously undetected areas of potential credit risk exposure for
the bank. The linkages between different categories of risk that are likely to emerge in times
of crisis should be fully understood. In case of adverse circumstances, there may be a
substantial correlation of various risks, especially credit and market risk. Scenario analysis
and stress testing are useful ways of assessing areas of potential problems.
70. Stress testing should involve identifying possible events or future changes in
economic conditions that could have unfavourable effects on a bank’s credit exposures and
assessing the bank’s ability to withstand such changes. Three areas that banks could usefullyexamine are: (i) economic or industry downturns; (ii) market-risk events; and (iii) liquidity
conditions. Stress testing can range from relatively simple alterations in assumptions about
one or more financial, structural or economic variables to the use of highly sophisticated
financial models. Typically, the latter are used by large, internationally active banks.
71. Whatever the method of stress testing used, the output of the tests should be
reviewed periodically by senior management and appropriate action taken in cases where the
results exceed agreed tolerances. The output should also be incorporated into the process for
assigning and updating policies and limits.
72. The bank should attempt to identify the types of situations, such as economic
downturns, both in the whole economy or in particular sectors, higher than expected levels ofCredit risk management
23delinquencies and defaults, or the combinations of credit and market events, that could
produce substantial losses or liquidity problems. Such an analysis should be done on a
consolidated bank basis. Stress-test analyses should also include contingency plans regarding
actions management might take given certain scenarios. These can include such techniques as
hedging against the outcome or reducing the size of the exposure.
V. Ensuring Adequate Controls over Credit Risk
Principle 14: Banks must establish a system of independent, ongoing assessment of thebank’s credit risk management processes and the results of such reviews should be
communicated directly to the board of directors and senior management.
73. Because various appointed individuals throughout a bank have the authority to grant
credit, the bank should have an efficient internal review and reporting system in order to
manage effectively the bank’s various portfolios. This system should provide the board of
directors and senior management with sufficient information to evaluate the performance of
account officers and the condition of the credit portfolio.
74. Internal credit reviews conducted by individuals independent from the business
function provide an important assessment of individual credits and the overall quality of the
credit portfolio. Such a credit review function can help evaluate the overall credit
administration process, determine the accuracy of internal risk ratings and judge whether the
account officer is properly monitoring individual credits. The credit review function should
report directly to the board of directors, a committee with audit responsibilities, or senior
management without lending authority (e.g., senior management within the risk control
function).
Principle 15: Banks must ensure that the credit-granting function is being properly
managed and that credit exposures are within levels consistent with prudential
standards and internal limits. Banks should establish and enforce internal controls and
other practices to ensure that exceptions to policies, procedures and limits are reported
in a timely manner to the appropriate level of management for action.
75. The goal of credit risk management is to maintain a bank’s credit risk exposure
within parameters set by the board of directors and senior management. The establishment
and enforcement of internal controls, operating limits and other practices will help ensure thatCredit risk management
24credit risk exposures do not exceed levels acceptable to the individual bank. Such a system
will enable bank management to monitor adherence to the established credit risk objectives.
76. Limit systems should ensure that granting of credit exceeding certain predetermined
levels receive prompt management attention. An appropriate limit system should assist
management in controlling credit risk exposures, initiating discussion about opportunities and
risks, and monitoring actual risk taking against predetermined credit risk tolerances.
77. Internal audits of the credit risk processes should be conducted on a periodic basis to
determine that credit activities are in compliance with the bank’s credit policies and
procedures, that credits are authorised within the guidelines established by the bank’s board of
directors and that the existence, quality and value of individual credits are accurately being
reported to senior management. Such audits should also be used to identify areas of weakness
in the credit risk management process, policies and procedures as well as any exceptions to
policies, procedures and limits.
Principle 16: Banks must have a system in place for early remedial action on
deteriorating credits, managing problem credits and similar workout situations.
78. One reason for establishing a systematic credit review process is to identify
weakened or problem credits.12 A reduction in credit quality should be recognised at an early
stage when there may be more options available for improving the credit. Banks must have a
disciplined and vigorous remedial management process, triggered by specific events, that is
administered through the credit administration and problem recognition systems.
79. A bank’s credit risk policies should clearly set out how the bank will manage
problem credits. Banks differ on the methods and organisation they use to manage problem
credits. Responsibility for such credits may be assigned to the originating business function, aspecialised workout section, or a combination of the two, depending upon the size and nature
of the credit and the reason for its problems.
80. Effective workout programs are critical to managing risk in the portfolio. When a
bank has significant credit-related problems, it is important to segregate the workout function
from the area that originated the credit. The additional resources, expertise and more
concentrated focus of a specialised workout section normally improve collection results. A
workout section can help develop an effective strategy to rehabilitate a troubled credit or to
12See footnote 6.Credit risk management
25increase the amount of repayment ultimately collected. An experienced workout section can
also provide valuable input into any credit restructurings organised by the business function.
VI. The Role of Supervisors
Principle 17: Supervisors should require that banks have an effective system in place to
identify, measure, monitor and control credit risk as part of an overall approach to riskmanagement. Supervisors should conduct an independent evaluation of a bank’s
strategies, policies, procedures and practices related to the granting of credit and the
ongoing management of the portfolio. Supervisors should consider setting prudential
limits to restrict bank exposures to single borrowers or groups of connected
counterparties.
81. Although the board of directors and senior management bear the ultimate
responsibility for an effective system of credit risk management, supervisors should, as part of
their ongoing supervisory activities, assess the system in place at individual banks to identify,
measure, monitor and control credit risk. This should include an assessment of any
measurement tools (such as internal risk ratings and credit risk models) used by the bank. In
addition, they should determine that the board of directors effectively oversees the credit risk
management process of the bank and that management monitors risk positions, and
compliance with and appropriateness of policies.
82. To evaluate the quality of credit risk management systems, supervisors can take a
number of approaches. A key element in such an evaluation is the determination by
supervisors that the bank is utilising sound asset valuation procedures. Most typically,
supervisors, or the external auditors on whose work they partially rely, conduct a review of
the quality of a sample of individual credits. In those instances where the supervisory analysis
agrees with the internal analysis conducted by the bank, a higher degree of dependence can be
placed on the use of such internal reviews for assessing the overall quality of the credit
portfolio and the adequacy of provisions and reserves
13. Supervisors or external auditors
should also assess the quality of a bank’s own internal validation process where internal risk
13 The New Capital Adequacy Framework anticipates that, subject to supervisory approval, banks’ internal rating
methodologies may be used as a basis for regulatory capital calculation. Guidance to supervisors specific to this purpose
will be published in due course.Credit risk management
26ratings and/or credit risk models are used. Supervisors should also review the results of any
independent internal reviews of the credit-granting and credit administration functions.
Supervisors should also make use of any reviews conducted by the bank’s external auditors,
where available.
83. Supervisors should take particular note of whether bank management recognises
problem credits at an early stage and takes the appropriate actions.14 Supervisors should
monitor trends within a bank’s overall credit portfolio and discuss with senior management
any marked deterioration. Supervisors should also assess whether the capital of the bank, in
addition to its provisions and reserves, is adequate related to the level of credit risk identified
and inherent in the bank’s various on- and off-balance sheet activities.
84. In reviewing the adequacy of the credit risk management process, home country
supervisors should also determine that the process is effective across business lines,
subsidiaries and national boundaries. It is important that supervisors evaluate the credit risk
management system not only at the level of individual businesses or legal entities but also
across the wide spectrum of activities and subsidiaries within the consolidated banking
organisation.
85. After the credit risk management process is evaluated, the supervisors should address
with management any weaknesses detected in the system, excess concentrations, the
classification of problem credits and the estimation of any additional provisions and the effect
on the bank’s profitability of any suspension of interest accruals. In those instances where
supervisors determine that a bank’s overall credit risk management system is not adequate or
effective for that bank’s specific credit risk profile, they should ensure the bank takes the
appropriate actions to improve promptly its credit risk management process.86. Supervisors should consider setting prudential limits (e.g., large exposure limits) that
would apply to all banks, irrespective of the quality of their credit risk management process.
Such limits would include restricting bank exposures to single borrowers or groups of
connected counterparties. Supervisors may also want to impose certain reporting requirements
for credits of a particular type or exceeding certain established levels. In particular, special
attention needs to be paid to credits granted to counterparties “connected” to the bank, or to
each other.
14See footnote 6.Credit risk management
27Appendix
Common Sources of Major Credit Problems
1. Most major banking problems have been either explicitly or indirectly caused by
weaknesses in credit risk management. In supervisors’ experience, certain key problems tend
to recur. Severe credit losses in a banking system usually reflect simultaneous problems in
several areas, such as concentrations, failures of due diligence and inadequate monitoring.This appendix summarises some of the most common problems related to the broad areas of
concentrations, credit processing, and market- and liquidity-sensitive credit exposures.
Concentrations
2. Concentrations are probably the single most important cause of major credit
problems. Credit concentrations are viewed as any exposure where the potential losses are
large relative to the bank’s capital, its total assets or, where adequate measures exist, the
bank’s overall risk level. Relatively large losses
15 may reflect not only large exposures , but
also the potential for unusually high percentage losses given default .
3. Credit concentrations can further be grouped roughly into two categories:
• Conventional credit concentrations  would include concentrations of credits to
single borrowers or counterparties, a group of connected counterparties, and sectors
or industries, such as commercial real estate, and oil and gas.
• Concentrations based on common or correlated risk factors  reflect subtler or
more situation-specific factors, and often can only be uncovered through analysis.Disturbances in Asia and Russia in late 1998 illustrate how close linkages among
emerging markets under stress conditions and previously undetected correlations
between market and credit risks, as well as between those risks and liquidity risk, can
produce widespread losses.
4. Examples of concentrations based on the potential for unusually deep losses often
embody factors such as leverage, optionality, correlation of risk factors and structured
financings that concentrate risk in certain tranches. For example, a highly leveraged borrower
15Losses are equal to the exposure times the percentage loss given the event of default.Credit risk management
28will likely produce larger credit losses for a given severe price or economic shock than a less
leveraged borrower whose capital can absorb a significant portion of any loss. The onset of
exchange rate devaluations in late 1997 in Asia revealed the correlation between exchange
rate devaluation and declines in financial condition of foreign exchange derivative
counterparties resident in the devaluing country, producing very substantial losses relative to
notional amounts of those derivatives. The risk in a pool of assets can be concentrated in a
securitisation into subordinated tranches and claims on leveraged special purpose vehicles,
which in a downturn would suffer substantial losses.
5. The recurrent nature of credit concentration problems, especially involving
conventional credit concentrations, raises the issue of why banks allow concentrations to
develop. First, in developing their business strategy, most banks face an inherent trade-off
between choosing to specialise in a few key areas with the goal of achieving a market
leadership position and diversifying their income streams, especially when they are engaged
in some volatile market segments. This trade-off has been exacerbated by intensified
competition among banks and non-banks alike for traditional banking activities, such as
providing credit to investment grade corporations. Concentrations appear most frequently to
arise because banks identify “hot” and rapidly growing industries and use overly optimistic
assumptions about an industry’s future prospects, especially asset appreciation and the
potential to earn above-average fees and/or spreads. Banks seem most susceptible to
overlooking the dangers in such situations when they are focused on asset growth or market
share.
6. Banking supervisors should have specific regulations limiting concentrations to one
borrower or set of related borrowers, and, in fact, should also expect banks to set much lowerlimits on single-obligor exposure. Most credit risk managers in banks also monitor industry
concentrations. Many banks are exploring techniques to identify concentrations based on
common risk factors or correlations among factors. While small banks may find it difficult not
to be at or near limits on concentrations, very large banking organisations must recognise that,
because of their large capital base, their exposures to single obligors can reach imprudent
levels while remaining within regulatory limits.
Credit Process Issues
7. Many credit problems reveal basic weaknesses in the credit granting and monitoring
processes. While shortcomings in underwriting and management of market-related creditCredit risk management
29exposures represent important sources of losses at banks, many credit problems would have
been avoided or mitigated by a strong internal credit process.
8. Many banks find carrying out a thorough credit assessment  (or basic due diligence)
a substantial challenge. For traditional bank lending, competitive pressures and the growth of
loan syndication techniques create time constraints that interfere with basic due diligence.
Globalisation of credit markets increases the need for financial information based on sound
accounting standards and timely macroeconomic and flow of funds data. When this
information is not available or reliable, banks may dispense with financial and economic
analysis and support credit decisions with simple indicators of credit quality, especially if they
perceive a need to gain a competitive foothold in a rapidly growing foreign market. Finally,
banks may need new types of information, such as risk measurements, and more frequent
financial information, to assess relatively newer counterparties, such as institutional investors
and highly leveraged institutions.
9. The absence of testing and validation of new lending techniques  is another
important problem. Adoption of untested lending techniques in new or innovative areas of the
market, especially techniques that dispense with sound principles of due diligence or
traditional benchmarks for leverage, have led to serious problems at many banks. Sound
practice calls for the application of basic principles to new types of credit activity. Any new
technique involves uncertainty about its effectiveness. That uncertainty should be reflected in
somewhat greater conservatism and corroborating indicators of credit quality. An example of
the problem is the expanded use of credit-scoring models in consumer lending in the United
States and some other countries. Large credit losses experienced by some banks for particular
tranches of certain mass-marketed products indicates the potential for scoring weaknesses.10. Some credit problems arise from subjective decision-making by senior
management  of the bank. This includes extending credits to companies they own or with
which they are affiliated, to personal friends, to persons with a reputation for financial
acumen or to meet a personal agenda, such as cultivating special relationships with celebrities.
11. Many banks that experienced asset quality problems in the 1990s lacked an effective
credit review process  (and indeed, many banks had no credit review function). Credit review
at larger banks usually is a department made up of analysts, independent of the lending
officers, who make an independent assessment of the quality of a credit or a credit
relationship based on documentation such as financial statements, credit analysis provided by
the account officer and collateral appraisals. At smaller banks, this function may be more
limited and performed by internal or external auditors. The purpose of credit review is toCredit risk management
30provide appropriate checks and balances to ensure that credits are made in accordance with
bank policy and to provide an independent judgement of asset quality, uninfluenced by
relationships with the borrower. Effective credit review not only helps to detect poorly
underwritten credits, it also helps prevent weak credits from being granted, since credit
officers are likely to be more diligent if they know their work will be subject to review.
12. A common and very important problem among troubled banks in the early 1990s was
their failure to monitor borrowers or collateral values . Many banks neglected to obtain
periodic financial information from borrowers or real estate appraisals in order to evaluate the
quality of loans on their books and the adequacy of collateral. As a result, many banks failed
to recognise early signs that asset quality was deteriorating and missed opportunities to work
with borrowers to stem their financial deterioration and to protect the bank’s position. This
lack of monitoring led to a costly process by senior management to determine the dimension
and severity of the problem loans and resulted in large losses.
13. In some cases, the failure to perform adequate due diligence and financial analysis
and to monitor the borrower can result in a breakdown of controls to detect credit-related
fraud . For example, banks experiencing fraud-related losses have neglected to inspect
collateral, such as goods in a warehouse or on a showroom floor, have not authenticated or
valued financial assets presented as collateral, or have not required audited financial
statements and carefully analysed them. An effective credit review department and
independent collateral appraisals are important protective measures, especially to ensure that
credit officers and other insiders are not colluding with borrowers.
14. In addition to shortcomings in due diligence and credit analysis, bank credit
problems reflect other recurring problems in credit-granting decisions. Some banks analysecredits and decide on appropriate non-price credit terms, but do not use risk-sensitive
pricing . Banks that lack a sound pricing methodology and the discipline to follow
consistently such a methodology will tend to attract a disproportionate share of under-priced
risks. These banks will be increasingly disadvantaged relative to banks that have superior
pricing skills.
15. Many banks have experienced credit losses because of the failure to use sufficient
caution with certain leveraged credit arrangements . As noted above, credit extended to
highly leveraged borrowers is likely to have large losses in default. Similarly, leveraged
structures such as some buyout or debt restructuring strategies, or structures involving
customer-written options, generally introduce concentrated credit risks into the bank’s credit
portfolio and should only be used with financially strong customers. Often, however, suchCredit risk management
31structures are most appealing to weaker borrowers because the financing enables a substantial
upside gain if all goes well, while the borrower’s losses are limited to its net worth.
16. Many banks’ credit activities involve lending againstnon-financial assets . In such
lending, many banks have failed to make an adequate assessment of the correlation between
the financial condition of the borrower and the price changes and liquidity of the market for
the collateral assets. Much asset-based business lending (i.e. commercial finance, equipment
leasing, and factoring) and commercial real estate lending appear to involve a relatively high
correlation between borrower creditworthiness and asset values. Since the borrower’s income,
the principal source of repayment, is generally tied to the assets in question, deterioration in
the borrower’s income stream, if due to industry or regional economic problems, may be
accompanied by declines in asset values for the collateral. Some asset based consumer
lending (i.e. home equity loans, auto financing) exhibits a similar, if weaker, relationship
between the financial health of consumers and the markets for consumer assets.
17. A related problem is that many banks do not take sufficient account of business
cycle effects in lending. As income prospects and asset values rise in the ascending portion of
the business cycle, credit analysis may incorporate overly optimistic assumptions. Industries
such as retailing, commercial real estate and real estate investment trusts, utilities, and
consumer lending often experience strong cyclical effects. Sometimes the cycle is less related
to general business conditions than the product cycle in a relatively new, rapidly growing
sector, such as health care and telecommunications. Effective stress testing which takes
account of business or product cycle effects is one approach to incorporating into credit
decisions a fuller understanding of a borrower’s credit risk.
18. More generally, many underwriting problems reflect the absence of a thoughtful
consideration of downside scenarios . In addition to the business cycle, borrowers may be
vulnerable to changes in risk factors such as specific commodity prices, shifts in the
competitive landscape and the uncertainty of success in business strategy or management
direction. Many lenders fail to “stress test” or analyse the credit using sufficiently adverse
assumptions and thus fail to detect vulnerabilities.
Market and Liquidity-Sensitive Credit Exposures
19. Market and liquidity-sensitive exposures pose special challenges to the credit
processes at banks. Market-sensitive exposures include foreign exchange and financial
derivative contracts. Liquidity-sensitive exposures include margin and collateral agreements
with periodic margin calls, liquidity back-up lines, commitments and some letters of credit,Credit risk management
32and some unwind provisions of securitisations. The contingent nature of the exposure in these
instruments requires the bank to have the ability to assess the probability distribution of the
size of actual exposure in the future and its impact on both the borrower’s and the bank’s
leverage and liquidity.
20. An issue faced by virtually all financial institutions is the need to develop
meaningful measures of exposure that can be compared readily with loans and other credit
exposures. This problem is described at some length in the Basel Committee’s January 1999
study of exposures to highly leveraged institutions.16
21. Market-sensitive instruments require a careful analysis of the customer’s
willingness and ability to pay. Most market-sensitive instruments, such as financial
derivatives, are viewed as relatively sophisticated instruments, requiring some effort by both
the bank and the customer to ensure that the contract is well understood by the customer. The
link to changes in asset prices in financial markets means that the value of such instruments
can change very sharply and adversely to the customer, usually with a small, but non-zero
probability. Effective stress testing can reveal the potential for large losses, which sound
practice suggests should be disclosed to the customer. Banks have suffered significant losses
when they have taken insufficient care to ensure that the customer fully understood the
transaction at origination and subsequent large adverse price movements left the customer
owing the bank a substantial amount.
22. Liquidity-sensitive credit arrangements or instruments require a careful analysis of
the customer’s vulnerability to liquidity stresses , since the bank’s funded credit exposure
can grow rapidly when customers are subject to such stresses. Such increased pressure to have
sufficient liquidity to meet margin agreements supporting over-the-counter trading activitiesor clearing and settlement arrangements may directly reflect market price volatility. In other
instances, liquidity pressures in the financial system may reflect credit concerns and a
constricting of normal credit activity, leading borrowers to utilise liquidity backup lines or
commitments. Liquidity pressures can also be the result of inadequate liquidity risk
management by the customer or a decline in its creditworthiness, making an assessment of a
borrower’s or counterparty’s liquidity risk profile another important element of credit
analysis.
16See Banks’ Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions  and Sound Practices for Banks’ Interactions with Highly
Leveraged Institutions  (January 1999).Credit risk management
3323. Market- and liquidity-sensitive instruments change in riskiness with changes in the
underlying distribution of price changes and market conditions. For market-sensitive
instruments, for example, increases in the volatility of price changes effectively increases
potential exposures. Consequently, banks should conduct stress testing of volatility
assumptions .
24. Market- and liquidity-sensitive exposures, because they are probabilistic, can be
correlated with the creditworthiness of the borrower. This is an important insight gained from
the market turmoil in Asia, Russia and elsewhere in the course of 1997 and 1998. That is, the
same factor that changes the value of a market- or liquidity-sensitive instrument can also
influence the borrower’s financial health and future prospects. Banks need to analyse the
relationship between market- and liquidity-sensitive exposures and the default risk of
the borrower . Stress testing  shocking the market or liquidity factors — is a key element of
that analysis.

Budapest, 2018.		
CORVINUS UNIVERSITY OF BUDAPEST DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE Basics of Finance Authors Gábor Kürthy (Chapter 1, Chapter 2)
József Varga (Chapter 3)
Tamás Pesuth (Chapter 4)
Ágnes Vidovics-Dancs  (Chapter 5.1 - 5.3)
Ildikó Gelányi  (Chapter 5.4)
Géza Sebestyén (Chapter 5.5)
Eszter Boros (Chapter 6)
Gábor Sztanó  (Chapter 7)
Erzsébet Varga (Chapter 8)
Editor Gábor Kürthy
Reviewers Ágnes Vidovics-Dancs (Chapter 1)
György Surányi (Chapter 2)
Gábor Kürthy (Chapters 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)
Budapest, 2018. ISBN 978-963-503-743-8		 2TABLE OF CONTENTS Chapter 1 Technical introduction 4 ...............................................................................Chapter 2 Money and Banking from a Historical and Theoretical Perspective 7 ....2.1 Money in history and theory	 7
.................................................................................2.2 Production of money and creation of money	 9
.......................................................2.3 Fiat money	 18
............................................................................................................2.4 Modern monetary systems	 24
...................................................................................Bibliography	 32
...............................................................................................................Chapter 3 Banking Operations 33 ...................................................................................3.1 Passive banking oparations	 33
.................................................................................3.2 Active banking operations	 36
....................................................................................Chapter 4 Banking Risks and Regulation 39 .................................................................4.1 Financial intermediation	 39
.......................................................................................4.2 The role of banks and the diﬀerent types of banking	 39
...........................................4.3 Risks faced by banks	 40
...........................................................................................4.4 Banking regulation	 43
................................................................................................Bibliography	 47
...............................................................................................................Chapter 5 Securities Markets 48 ....................................................................................5.1. Basic terms	 48
.........................................................................................................5.2. Bond markets	 49
......................................................................................................5.3. Credit rating	 50
.........................................................................................................5.4 Stock exchanges	 52
..................................................................................................5.5 Derivatives	 57
............................................................................................................Bibliography	 61
...............................................................................................................Chapter 6 The Balance of Payments 62 .........................................................................6.1 Purpose of the BoP     	 62
.........................................................................................6.2 Basic Deﬁnitions and Principles	 63
...........................................................................6.3 Constructing the BoP Step by Step	 65
.....................................................................6.4 Concluding remarks	 70
.............................................................................................Bibliography	 71
...............................................................................................................Chapter 7 Foreign Exchange Markets 72 .......................................................................7.1 Introduction to FX-markets	 72
..................................................................................7.2 FX markets: demand and supply	 73
.........................................................................7.3 Exchange-rate theories	 74
........................................................................................7.4 Exchange-rate systems	 75
........................................................................................Chapter 8  Public Finance and Taxation 79 ....................................................................8.1 The economic functions of the government	 79
........................................................8.2 Revenues of the Government	 82...............................................................................
		 3CHAPTER 1 TECHNICAL INTRODUCTION To understand ﬁnance properly, one needs to have a solid grasp on the elemental deﬁnitions and techniques of accounting. For being able to keep track of the following chapters, we suggest the Reader studying the next few pages thoroughly.  The balance sheet is a ﬁnancial statement that represents an economic agent’s (a household, a company, a bank, a budgetary institution etc.) wealth by two approaches. Assets are listed on the left-hand side or asset side, resources ﬁnancing the assets are listed on the right-hand side or liability-equity side. The balance sheet is always in balance, that is:
ASSETS = LIABILITIES + EQUITY
When constructing the balance sheet, assets are listed ﬁrst, then liabilities. Shareholders’ equity is always a residual, i.e. it is the diﬀerence between assets and liabilities. The equity of a company or a bank is frequently referred to as capital, which can lead to misunderstandings. In this context, capital is not a pile of cash that can be invested. It is only a notional entry that shows what would be left if all the company’s debts were repaid. A negative book value of the capital means that the company is insolvent in the long run, i.e. it cannot repay all of its liabilities. 
Example: the balance sheet of a company Company “ABC” has 57,000 EUR worth of assets that are partially ﬁnanced by long- and short-term liabilities. Long-term (or non-current) liabilities - such as bonds issued or mortgages - are due over 12 months. Short-term (or current) liabilities - such as bills or taxes payable - mature within 12 months.
Economic events can change the balance sheet in four ways:
•both sides increase by the same amount •both sides decrease by the same amount •the asset side is restructured, i.e. some assets increase and others decrease •the liability-equity side is restructured, i.e. some liabilities or equity items increase and others decrease ABC Company, Balance sheet, at 31-Dec-2017Assets  (EUR)                            Liabilities  (EUR)                         Land                            25,000Long-term liabilities       15,000Machinery                   20,000Short-term liabilities         3,000      Inventories                     4,000Equity   (EUR)              39,000           Supplies                            6,000Cash                               2,000Total assets:                  57,000Total liabilities and equity: 57,000
		 4The following example helps to understand the issues described above. 
Example: bookkeeping In the ﬁrst month of 2018, the following events happened to ABC company:
➡1,000 EUR worth of inventories were bought, the company promised the supplier to pay in 60 days. 
Assets: 	 Inventories, +1,000 EUR	 Liabilities: Short-term liabilities, +1,000 EUR 	 	 	 	 	 	 Equity:	     no change ➡1,500 EUR worth of goods were sold for 1,900 EUR.
Assets: 	 Supply    -1,500 EUR 	 	 Liabilities:	 no change 	 	 Cash,    +1,900 EUR	 	 Equity:	+ 400 EUR ➡The company repaid 400 EUR short-term loan and 20 EUR interest.
Assets:	 Cash -420 EUR	 	 Liabilities:	 Short-term liabilities -400 EUR 	 	 	 	 	 	 Equity:	- 20 EUR ➡The National Competition Authority imposed a ﬁne of 500 EUR on the company, to be paid within 6 months.
Assets:	 no change	 	 	 Liabilities:	 Short-term liabilities, +500 EUR 	 	 	 	 	 	 Equity:	-500 EUR ➡An investment bank granted the company 5,000 EUR worth of loan with the maturity of 20 years. The company spent the proceeds on a new machinery.
Assets: 	 Machinery, +5,000 EUR	 Liabilities: Long-term liabilities, +5,000 EUR 	 	 	 	 	 	 Equity:	     no change In order to keep the balance, we followed the rules of double entry bookkeeping. At the end of January-2018, after booking all the events, the balance sheet looks like as follows: 
Economic events, mostly exchanges, always happen to two agents simultaneously, which leads to quadruple entry bookkeeping on the systemic level. If “A” does business with “B” then two changes arise in both balance sheets, which means four changes altogether. (In Latin, four is quattuor, that is where the term comes from.) Consider the following examples.
ABC Company, Balance sheet, at 31-Jan-2018Assets  (EUR)                            Liabilities  (EUR)                         Land                             25,000Long-term liabilities       20,000Machinery                    25,000Short-term liabilities         4,100      Inventories                     5,000Equity   (EUR)              38,880           Supply                            4,500Cash                               3,480Total assets:                  62,980Total liabilities and equity: 62,980
		 5Example: quadruple entry bookkeeping ➡Company “X” buys inventories from company “Y” and pays 4,000 EUR for them. Before the transaction, the book value of the traded inventories was 3,500 EUR.
➡Company “Z” pays 2,000 EUR wage to Mrs. M.
➡Mr. Q. repays 100 EUR of debt plus 5 EUR interest to Mrs. S. in cash.
From an accounting point of view, there are two kinds of goods. Real economic goods are on the asset side of one single balance sheet, while ﬁnancial goods appear in two balance sheets simultaneously: on the asset side of one balance sheet and on the liability-equity side of another one. A slice of bread or a bicycle are real economic goods; a mortgage loan, a commercial bill or a share are ﬁnancial goods. 
Financial goods on the liability-equity side are obligations, while those on the asset side are claims.  A commercial bill with the nominal value of 500 EUR is a claim to its owner and an obligation for its issuer. The issuer is legally bound to pay 500 EUR when the bill matures. In case of default - i.e. if the issuer is not able or not willing to pay -, the owner of the bill can sue the issuer. 
Shares might be regarded as ﬁnancial assets too, although in this case the issuer is not legally bound to pay any money. Shares are rather economic than legal promises to pay dividends or provide capital gains through the appreciation of their price. Disappointed owners - in case of no dividend payments and no price increase - can punish the issuer company on the market by selling the shares. What happens if investors start selling the shares of some company en masse? The price of the shares plummets which leads to the simultaneous devaluation of the assets of the company. (Remember, the value of the assets always has to be equal to the summed value of the liabilities and the equity. A price drop of shares devalues equity and assets simultaneously.) As assets are collateral behind the liabilities, a signiﬁcant drop in their value can lead to ﬁnancial diﬃculties. 
Company “X”Company “Y”Inventories +4,000Supply -3,500Bank account -4,000Bank account +4,000Equity    +500Company “Z”Mrs. M.Bank account -2,000Bank account +2,000Equity  -2,000Equity +2,000Mr. Q. Mrs.S.Cash -105Liabilities -100Claims -100Equity  -5Cash +105Equity +5
		 6CHAPTER 2 MONEY AND BANKING FROM A HISTORICAL AND THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE 2.1 Money in history and theory The historical emergence of money can be related to the emergence of market-based economies. For thousands of years, communities were organised by redistributive institutions, centralised rules coordinated production, consumption, investment, etc. Ancient Egypt and Babylonia are the most typical examples of redistributive empires, but even in the feudalistic European kingdoms, markets played only a minor role for a long time. (Polányi, 1944: Chapter 4) These markets are frequently described as places where rural farmers and urban manufacturers exchanged their products directly. However, it is easy to see that barter is a very ineﬃcient way of exchange, as the probability of double coincident of wants is low and by the growth of the number of market participants, it gets even lower. There is no historical proof that direct barter has ever played an important role in coordinating markets (Wray, 1993). Since the very advent of locally organised markets, buyers and sellers have been using a commonly accepted speciﬁc good as the medium of exchange. Primitive forms of money had been used before as store of value and standard of deferred payments, but in lack of markets, they have not functioned as the medium of exchange or the measure of value (Polányi, 1957). The most important function of ancient coins was probably the fact that the state (the king or the queen) accepted them when paying the taxes. This characteristic made primitive money generally acceptable on markets: as everyone had to pay taxes, sellers accepted coins because they knew they could (and in most cases, they should!) use them for tax payment, and they knew that other sellers from whom they would buy goods were thinking in the same way. It is tautological, but money is accepted because it is thought to be accepted.  
From this short introduction it has to be clear that money is deﬁned by its functions, i.e. we call something money if it is a
•medium of exchange, •standard of deferred payments, •store of value, •measure of value. Money as a means of exchange helps market-coordination in several dimensions. As mentioned above, general acceptance simpliﬁes trade by splitting long and hard discoverable chains of exchanges into small parts. Without money, theoretically, the economy as a whole must ﬁnd the market-clearing exchanges simultaneously to avoid disequilibrium. This cannot be implemented without the knowledge of some central planner, who, of course, does not exist. Besides, the use of money spares information: in a barter economy with N kinds of goods, the number of relative prices that market participants have to remember is  , whereas in an economy with N kinds of N*(N−1)2		 7goods and money, the number of absolute prices is  . If  , the size of the information set is 4,950 and 100 in the two cases respectively. 
In a monetised economy, debt is easy to measure and administer with the help of money, by which the two sides of a transaction (service and payment) can be separated in time. Expressing debts in monetary terms leads to more eﬃcient economic, social and legal procedures. For example, economic agents do not need to pay taxes by sacriﬁcing their labour and working for the state anymore. The state can collect taxes paid in money, and then pay for a competent workforce to execute special jobs. (Without money, some John has to work on state-owned farms or must serve as a soldier. The problem is that being an excellent wool-manufacturer, John knows nothing about agriculture or warfare. If instead, he pays taxes in money, skilled farmers and soldiers can be hired.) Another example from the ﬁeld of jurisdiction: in a society without money, a culprit always has to be imprisoned, executed or sentenced to penal servitude. However, with money, in a lot of cases, the sinner can literally pay for his sins.
Money as a store of value secures future both in the short- and in the long-run. Between two exchanges, the purchasing power can rest in money, which creates the possibility of intertemporal optimisation. The store of value and the standard of deferred payments functions are closely connected. Surplus agents (those who spent less in a period than they earned) can ﬁnance deﬁcit agents. The claim of surplus agents serves as the store of their postponed consumption, while the debt of deﬁcit agents is the price of their impatience for which they will pay later. 
Money measures the value of goods, services, wealth, debt, etc., which makes these things comparable. With money usage, a price can be assigned not only to exchangeable products but even to unmarketable stuﬀ like works of art, clear environment or life. It is needless to say that the measure of value and the means of exchange functions are hand in hand with each other - exchanges are based on the knowledge of prices expressed in monetary units. 
The transition from redistributive societies to market economies had been a long process, during which not only goods but labour and capital also became the subjects of exchange. This evolution was accompanied by diﬀerent mutations in the monetary system. Financial innovations were partially forced by the requirements of growing markets, as money supply had to keep pace with economic development. On the other hand, the interests of the state (and not necessarily those of the public…) lead to notable alterations of money and monetary institutions as well. In the next section, we will examine the most important changes through the lenses of an accountant, i.e. we will intensively use the techniques familiarised in the ﬁrst chapter of this book. However, the essence of the following is not the bookkeeping but the theoretical and practical understanding of how modern monetary systems have evolved and are operating today.
NN=100
		 82.2 Production of money and creation of money This tour begins with an imagined world where gold coins fulﬁl the functions of money. Gold coins are minted by the Royal Mint from raw gold extracted from mines or panned from rivers. Miners are obliged by law to surrender their gold to the Mint who issues stamped gold currency after the coinage. Coins are legal tender in the economy which means that producers, merchants, shop owners, etc., must accept them in exchange for their goods. On the other side, buyers are also obliged by the legal tender law to use coins as a medium of exchange. However, upon mutual agreements, parties are allowed to use alternative settlements in a given business situation. Summing up: if the buyer wants to pay with gold coins the seller must accept them; if the seller wants to be paid in gold coins the buyer must adapt; if they both agree they can use diﬀerent methods. 
Before the introduction of coinage and legal tender laws, a price system consisting of relative prices (for instance 10 kilograms of bread = 1 pair of boots) had evolved in the economy. An important vector of this system measured the values of goods in terms of gold (Figure 1). 
FIGURE 1: PRICES BEFORE THE INTRODUCTION OF COINAGE. 
The Royal Mint minted one ounce of gold into 10 pieces of coins with the nominal value of 1 shilling stamped on them (or the equivalent of it, for example, 2 pieces of 5 shilling coins). One shilling as a measurement of mass equals one-ﬁfth of an ounce, thus the Royal Mint issued coins that contained half of the quantity of gold of their nominal value. However, because of the legal tender law, economic agents had to accept these coins at nominal value. Thus the price system changed (Figure 2).
FIGURE 2: PRICES AFTER THE INTRODUCTION OF COINAGE. 
What happened at the Mint? The miner sold 1 ounce of gold for 5 shillings, the Mint kept the rest. Suppose that the unit cost of minting 1 ounce of gold was 1 shilling. After 1000 kg of wheat500 liters of beer1 ounce of gold = ……5 acres of land
1000 kg of wheat500 liters of beer5 shillings = ……5 acres of land		 9deducing this cost, the proﬁt of the Mint was 4 shillings. This proﬁt served as the revenue of the State. 
By appearing on the asset side, the gold found in the mine increases the miner’s balance sheet. As the miner knows that he has to surrender the gold, and eventually he will keep half of the amount mined, both his liabilities and equity increase by half of the value of the gold (Figure 3). It is worth to notice that mining is not an exchange of goods or services, thus no other balance sheet has to be involved when accounting for it.
For the sake of simplicity, the costs of mining were set aside, or put it in another way, the result of the mining reﬂected by Figure 3 is the net result after deducting the costs.
FIGURE 3: ACCOUNTING FOR THE MINING OF 1 OUNCE OF GOLD. Surrendering his gold and getting the proceeds after coinage rearranges the balance sheet of the miner: he is relieved of his gold, half of which being his liability and receives 5 shillings in gold coins. The balance sheet of the Mint (which can be identiﬁed with the State) increases by 4 shillings: 4 shillings as coins on the asset side and 4 shillings of equity. The remaining 1 shilling is partially the salary of mint-workers (plus salary in coins on the asset side, plus the same amount of equity on the other side), and partially is paid out for minting materials (for example copper) (plus the price of material on the asset side, and minus the material sold on the same side). Figure 4 accounts for these changes.
FIGURE 4: ACCOUNTING FOR THE MINTING OF 1 OUNCE OF GOLD. 
The proﬁt from coinage can be further enhanced through debasement. This happens when the Royal Mint decreases the gold content of the coins in one of the following two ways: (1) by the power of law, it announces that from now on one ounce of gold is minted into 12 shillings, but new and old coins have equal market value; (2) every old coin is reminted, i.e. one-ﬁfth of their gold content is extracted, and the proceeds are kept by the state. 
Task: account for the changes that the debasement causes in the diﬀerent balance sheets!
Minergold, +10 shillings liabilities, +5 shillingsequity, +5 shilling
    Mint (State)Minergold coins, + 4 shillings equity, +4 shillingsgold, -10 shillingsliabilities, -5 shillingsgold coins, +5 shillingsOthersgold coins,  +1 shillingequity, +0,5 shillingssupply, -0,5 shillings
		 10With the general acceptance of royal coins, the introduction of minting and the legal tender laws lead to more eﬃcient market coordination. However, there are practical and economic problems with coin usage. For security reasons, especially in wholesale commerce, transportation and shipment costs of the gold currency can be enormous. Besides that, coins wear oﬀ with intensive circulation thus the ratio between their face value (nominal value) and real value increases. As sellers have to accept coins at their face value, buyers pay with worn ones. Gresham’s law prevails: bad quality money drives out good quality money from circulation as the former is used as a means of exchange, while the latter is used in the function of store of value. 
The most important economic problem is the relative shortage of money. This occurs when the growth rate of the real economy is higher than the growth rate of gold-mining, and the velocity of circulation cannot compensate for the diﬀerence. The Fisher-equation (1) helps to understand this phenomenon. 
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (1)
On the right-hand side of the equation,   measures the nominal value of economic transactions in a given period of time. This is the scalar product of the ordered   and  vectors: a   pair denotes the price and the quantity of the i-th transaction, thus the   product is the nominal value of the i-th transaction. The summation of all transactions ( ) is the nominal value of all economic aﬀairs in the examined time period. 
The left-hand side of the Fisher-equation measures the monetary side of the economy. One piece of coin can mediate more transactions in a given time period (“A” pays “B” with this coin, “B” pays “C” with the same coin, etc.) The velocity of money ( ) is the average number of transactions a given coin takes part in. Last but not least,   is the quantity of money in the economy. 
In each and every atomic transaction, money and goods with the same value ﬂow in the opposite directions, so the Fisher-equation seems to be a mere identity. However, in order to hold this identity at the end of every time period, the dynamics of the two sides have to adapt to each other. The nominal value of transactions ( ) can increase only if the nominal value of money circulation ( ) follows the growth. Out of the two factors on the monetary side, the velocity of money is constrained by institutional reasons (Bordo - Jonung, 1987).
First, the structure of the economy determines how often money should change hands. An economy where production is vertically integrated requires fewer money ﬂows than a horizontally integrated one. In the former, big companies manage whole production lines (sowing the seeds, harvesting the wheat, baking and selling the bread) without the need of money between the successive production stages, while in the latter, smaller ﬁrms MxV=PxQPxQPQ(pi,qi)pi*qiPxQ=∑pi*qiVMPxQMxV
		 11specialise in diﬀerent activities and money-ﬂows accompany the production. Though the structure of economies is changing constantly, this evolution is a slow process, and so the velocity of circulation adjusts gradually.
Second, the development level of the payment and settlement systems determines how easily money can change hands. In a pure cash economy, parties must meet physically to hand over a payment, whereas, with electronic payment systems, this process is much faster though still bounded. 
There could be special circumstances when the velocity of circulation increases beyond these boundaries. During hyperinﬂation money loses its function of store of value, as economic agents expecting fast growing prices try to exchange money for goods even if they do not need those goods to consume. This, of course, reinforces the hyperinﬂation process. However, hyperinﬂation or even inﬂation triggered by excessive growth of money supply is unimaginable in a commodity money system. The reverse case prevails: the insuﬃcient money supply can lead to deﬂating prices and as agents in the hope of further decreasing prices postpone their consumption to a slowing economy.
As the velocity of money is constrained, the growth rate of the quantity of money should adapt to the growth rate of the nominal value of transactions in the long run. In a monetary system where commodity-money is the result of production (mining and minting) and the material of it is scarce, the rate of economic growth will be constrained, sooner or later, by the growth rate of the quantity of money. This situation is called the relative shortage of money. 
The practical and economic problems of coin-usage described above lead to ﬁnancial innovations that eventually changed the whole monetary system. First of all, in our imagined economy, private agents founded depository institutions. Anyone could depose his gold coins in one of these institutions who issued promissory notes (or simply, notes) in exchange. A promissory note is a written promise of the issuer to pay at sight the appropriate amount of gold coins. That is, whenever someone turns in a 10 shilling note, the issuer must immediately redeem it into 10 shillings in coins. Notes are not legal tender, however, as long as market participants believe that they can be converted into coins, notes - upon mutual agreement - can be used as means of exchange. 
What happens when a merchant places gold coins in a depository institution? He swaps money for notes, which is a structural change on the asset side of his balance sheet. Both sides of the depository’s balance sheet increase: money appears on the asset side, while the promise of paying this money out whenever it is demanded, is a new liability (Figure 5). The note is a ﬁnancial instrument: it is the asset of the merchant and simultaneously, the liability of the issuer. In its physical form, it is at the merchant, the term “promissory note” in the depository’s balance sheet is the name of this special liability. The note is a security as well, it can be traded away on the market either for money or for some goods. The promise embodied in the note is not personal: it is not the merchant but any future owner of the note who can ask for the redemption. 
It is worth to emphasise that promissory notes were convertible to gold coins by anyone and anytime at face value. That is, a 1 shilling note equals a 1 shilling coin as long as 		 12convertibility is secured and economic agents trust the promise of the issuer institution. As we will see, this promise proved to be the most important disciplinary force in the monetary system. 
FIGURE 5: PLACING MONEY IN A DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION.* * as everything is measured in shillings, we do not use the term on the ﬁgures anymore
Because of the practical problems of coin-usage, promissory notes became enormously popular. As depository institutions proved to be trustworthy, note owners did not worry about the security of convertibility. Practically, private businesses began to replace coins with notes. However, as note issuance did not change the total amount of circulating media of exchange, the problem of relative money shortage was still to be solved. 
It is worth to notice that funding and managing a depository institution described above is not a proﬁtable activity. Clerks at the oﬃces change coins for notes and vice versa, but unless there is some cut on the deposits (say, the depository issues 99 shillings in notes for 100 shillings in coins), the costs of salaries and security arrangements will lead to massive losses in the income statement. 
Task: account for the changes in the balance sheets if the depository institution applies a 2 percent cut on deposited coins!
In order to gain some proﬁt in their business, depository institutions started to lend out money. Shortly after the introduction of this new activity, managers observed a very interesting phenomenon: the bulk of borrowers, immediately after signing the contract, without even leaving the building, deposited their borrowed coins, i.e. they changed their gold coins for promissory notes. This seemingly weird act is quite understandable: debtors needed purchasing power, they wanted to buy something on the market, and for practical reasons, by that time notes have become more popular than coins. Promissory notes substituted gold coins perfectly in their functions of payment and medium of exchange, besides, their physical characteristics, such as weight and portability made them easier to use than coins. As a consequence of this observation, managers made an eﬃciency modiﬁcation to the lending business: by signing the credit-contract, borrowers received promissory notes directly. Of course, anyone could redeem the notes into coins, but only the minority of costumers did so. 
What happens to the balance sheets of the diﬀerent parties? Consider ﬁrst the case when costumers borrow gold coins directly (step 1), then convert them into promissory notes (step 2). Lending out gold coins is a structural change on the asset side of the creditor: coins are swapped for the promise of repayment. The latter is a new liability of the Depository Institution    Merchantgold coins, +10promissory notes, +10gold coins, -10promissory notes, +10 
		 13costumer, while the coins received increase the asset side. Converting coins into notes restructures the asset side of the borrower and increases the balance sheet of the lender (Figure 6B). 
FIGURE 6A: THE BALANCE SHEET OF THE DEPOSITORY BEFORE PROVIDING THE LOAN.  FIGURE 6B: ACCOUNTING FOR A 5 SHILLING LOAN IN TWO STEPS. 
Consolidating these two steps (Figure 6C) leads to the second case, which shows the result of lending out notes directly, instead of coins. Now the borrower has the notes amongst her assets and is liable to pay back the loan; the lender has the promise of the borrower as an asset and is liable to redeem the new notes into coins whenever it is demanded. The borrower and the lender swapped their IOUs: the borrower promised to pay back money according to the conditions of the credit contract, the lender promised to pay at sight the coins, upon the request of any future owner of the notes. 
FIGURE 6C: ACCOUNTING FOR A 5 SHILLING LOAN IN ONE STEP. FIGURE 6D: THE BALANCE SHEET OF THE DEPOSITORY AFTER PROVIDING A 5 SHILLING LOAN. By this act, purchasing power is created out of nowhere, which is very similar to the money creation in the modern banking system (see later). Initially the depository had gold coins, and after providing the loan it still has the same amount (compare Figures 6A and 6D!). Thus, technically gold is not needed to provide a loan. However, as the created notes are convertible to gold, business wise it is crucial to have enough reserves. 
Bank / Depositorygold Xpromissory notes XBank / Depository    Costumergold coins, -5gold coins, +5loan, +5loan, +5gold coins, +5promissory notes, +5gold coins, -5promissory notes, +5
Bank / Depository  Costumerloan, +5promissory notes, +5promissory notes, +5loan, +5Bank / Depositorygold   X
loan   5promissory notes X + 5
		 14The introduction of lending leads to many changes. First of all, lenders are not only depository institutions anymore, we can call them banks henceforth. Second, lending increases the quantity of money circulating in the economy, which could solve the problem of relative money shortage. On the microeconomic (institutional) level, more complex managing skills are needed. Before starting to lend out money, the convertibility of the total amount of the notes was technically secured, as the amount of gold coins on the depositories’ asset side equalled the amount of notes amongst their liabilities. Lending creates new liabilities (new notes) that are backed by the promise of repayment. As there is no diﬀerence between notes originating from depositing coins, and those created by lending, the whole quantity of promissory notes are now partially backed by gold coin reserves of banks, and partially by loans they granted. Reserves are generally the highest forms of money or ultimate liquidity, for which economic agents can convert their claims on the members of the banking system.
Assuming that all debts will be repaid, only a liquidity problem prevails: in the short run, the convertibility of notes is constrained by the level of reserves. However, there are always some debtors who default on their debt, which can lead to solvency problems in the long run. To minimise the probability of failing to keep the promise of convertibility, banks must properly examine their debtors’ ﬁnancial status, and price the loans accordingly. 
Example: pricing loans  Let   denote the probability of default on a loan. If   is 3% then expectedly 3 shillings out of 100 shillings lent will not be repaid. Of course, banks try to minimise this probability, but even with the most sophisticated screening techniques, it cannot be beaten down to zero. 
Let   denote the interest rate on loans. If   is 6% then a debtor has to pay 6 shillings of interest on a 100 shilling debt annually. If the maturity of the loan is less than one year, the debtor pays less interest (for example 3 shillings for half a year). If the debt matures over one year, this 6 percent must be paid accordingly. 
Let   denote the unit cost of managing a loan. If   is 1% then the cost of lending 100 shillings is 1 shilling. This cost involves elements such as screening and monitoring the debtor, writing the contract, etc.
Finally,   denotes the cost of the liability created by lending. Although banks do not borrow funds to lend, still, the liabilities (promissory notes, later deposits) incur costs: they have to  be managed, sometimes interest is paid on them etc. 
Considering the above data the expected proﬁt of the bank on a 100 shilling loan is: 
 . 
The ﬁrst term is the income of the bank:   shillings will be repaid with interest. The second term ( ) is the credit-loss from defaults, the next term is the cost of lending 100 shillings, the last term is the cost of the created liability. Assuming perfect competition, this proﬁt is zero if  . If the probability of default is 3 percent, the unit cost of lending and the cost of liability are both 1 percent then the minimal interest rate on loans should be 5.15 percent. 
ppiLiLcLcLrd100*(1−p)*rL−100*p−100*cL−100*rd100*(1−p)−100*prL=p+cL+rd1−p		 15Besides bank loans, private credit started to ﬂourish in the economy in the form of commercial bills. A commercial bill is a security embodying the short-term debt of a merchant who is unable to pay upon delivery. Instead, he promises to pay later by signing the bill. If the supplier does not want his business to fail, he accepts the bill that he can trade away later, i.e. he can use the IOU of the original issuer (the merchant) to pay for some shipment. (See Figure 7 for accounting details.) Commercial bills are not legal tender, thus, as mentioned before, a mutual agreement between the trading partners is needed to settle business with them. The liquidity of bills depends on the trustworthiness of the issuer. If “A” wants to pay “B” with the bill issued by “C”, “B” will accept this form of payment only if he believes either that “C” is able to repay when the bill matures or some “D” will accept the bill in some later transaction. The more reputable a private agent is, the more liquid his IOUs will be. However, only close business partners can rate the reputation of an agent, which makes the liquidity of commercial bills pretty constrained. 
FIGURE 7: ISSUING A COMMERCIAL BILL. 
Task: account for the changes in the balance sheets if the sold supply is worth 50 shillings, i.e. the manufacturer earns 10 shillings proﬁt by selling it!
Banks can help this problem by either accepting commercial bills or buying them by issuing their own bills. The two cases diﬀer only technically, as in the ﬁrst case the bank merely signs or stamps the commercial bill (this is the “bank’s acceptance”), which guarantees payment if the issuer defaults, while in the second case, the bank writes its own IOU and swaps the commercial bill for it. However, the two cases are essentially the same: the bank takes the credit risk of the issuer on its own balance sheet, replacing it with its own credit risk, which is, of course, signiﬁcantly lower than the original issuer’s. 
It is even better if the bank buys the commercial bill by paying out gold coins or by issuing promissory notes. The former can be ruled out on the grounds discussed before: the seller of the bill will convert coins into notes immediately for practical reasons. The diﬀerence between the nominal value of the commercial bill and the discounted amount paid for it generates proﬁt for the bank. 
Historically it was a long process til the banks started to discount commercial bills by issuing promissory notes. At the ﬁrst stage of this process the banks bought commercial bills by issuing their own bill, the so called banker’s bill. As it was a short term security embodying the bank’s debt with interest, it did not create an immediate liquidity risk. The banks managed the discounting business by matching the cash (gold coin) outﬂow caused by the maturing banker’s bills with the cash inﬂow from maturing commercial bills. A minor modiﬁcation to this business was when the banks started to issue the banker’s ManufacturerMerchantsupply, -60goods, +60commercial bill, +60commercial bill, +60
		 16bills in standardised denomination (e.g. instead of issuing a bill with the face value of 47 shillings, the bank issued two 20 shillings bills, one 5 shillings bill, and two 1 shilling bills). Major modiﬁcations came later, when the banks issued bills without maturity and interest.  This changed the nature of the above mentioned management. A banker’s bill without maturity is essentially a promissory note: it is convertible to gold on demand. Thus, now the bank has to match cash outﬂows triggered by redemption with cash inﬂows from maturing commercial bills. This business could be managed by changing the discount rate, i.e. the rate by which incoming commercial bills were valued. If the net cashﬂow of the bank turned negative, the bank increased the discount rate by which some bill-owners were discouraged from discounting their bills. 
Example: commercial bill Suppose that manufacturer “X” has a commercial bill with the nominal value of 60 shillings issued by merchant “Y”. “X” has to pay for a shipment next week but he has no money, and the bill matures only in 90 days. As he is not sure that he can pay for the shipment by trading away the bill, he decides to sell it to a bank. The bank buys the bill for 59 shillings paid out in promissory notes. The 1 shilling diﬀerence is the price of two services. First, promissory notes are more liquid than the commercial bill, so the bank provides a liquidity service. Second, the bank relieves the costumer of the credit risk. The 90-days discount rate the bank applied was  . 
The bank buys the commercial bill by expanding its balance sheet. The asset side is increased by the discounted value of the bill (59 shillings in the above example), while the liability side is increased by the newly created promissory notes. Upon maturity, the debtor will pay the nominal value of the bill in notes, which removes the commercial bill from the asset side and simultaneously, destroys the same amount of notes from the other side. The diﬀerence between the nominal value and the discounted value increases the capital of the bank. If the issuer of the bill fails to serve his debt then this will be a minus bill from the assets (at a discounted value) and a negative item in the capital. 
FIGURE 8: DISCOUNTING A COMMERCIAL BILL.* 
* the bank books the bill at its discounted value (59) instead of its nominal value (60). The capital gain of 1 shilling will enter the balance sheet upon repayment.
It is worth to notice that there are two diﬀerent series of events that inﬂuence the same balance-sheet structure. If “A” borrows money from a bank and pays “B” with this money for some shipment, then “A” has some goods on his asset side and a debt on the liability side; “B” swapped goods for promissory notes; the bank granted a loan (assets) by creating notes (liability). If “A” buys some goods from “B” and pays by issuing a commercial bill, after which “B” sells this bill to the bank who buys it by issuing promissory notes, the result is the same regarding the balance sheets of the three parties. 160=1.67%
ManufacturerBankcommercial bill, -60commercial bill, +50promissory notes, +59promissory notes, +59equity, -1
		 17An important diﬀerence is, however, that in the latter case the private debt the bank has amongst its assets is a tradable security, while in the former case it is a contracted debt that cannot be sold easily.  
2.3 Fiat money Despite its powerful means, such as taxing private agents, determining monopoly rights over mine-products, or debasing the currency to raise revenues, the state has been the biggest debtor of the economy for a long time. Sometimes violent or innovative solutions were needed to successfully manage high levels of budget deﬁcit or debt. Before the modern era of market-based economies, kings and queens frequently went into war against their creditors or executed them as the most eﬃcient way of decreasing debt. These ancient methods of debt management, however, faded away over time. (For further exciting features of sovereign defaults, see Vidovics-Dancs (2014).) If debt neither can be repaid nor served in some other way, a bank is needed who willingly grants a new loan upon the maturity of the old one. 
The ﬁnancial aﬀairs of our imagined world gave new ideas to the experts of the crown, which eventually led to the profound transformation of the monetary system. The state convinced some wealthy businessmen to found a new bank (henceforth: the central bank) and lend the raised capital to the state. In exchange, the state endowed this new bank with the right to issue legal tender in the form of banknotes. Banknotes are the liabilities of the central bank.
The signiﬁcance of this change is worth to emphasise. Before the founding of the central bank, gold coins and promissory notes issued by diﬀerent banks were circulating in the economy, but only the coins were legal tender. The acceptance of the notes issued by any bank depended on trust, i.e. on the belief that the bank is ready and able to convert them into coins. The acceptance of the central bank’s banknotes is, however, forced by the law, which makes these notes and the coins equivalent. Banknotes are called ﬁat money because they do not have intrinsic value end yet must be accepted by the rules of the state. Fiat money can be distinguished from ﬁduciary money, that does not have intrinsic value either, but its acceptance depends on trust and not on power (Mises, 1912).
Besides the power of the law, economic incentives were introduced to create demand for the new currency. First, the crown and the central bank promised to convert banknotes into gold coins on demand. Second, the state made it possible to pay taxes with banknotes. Two schools of thoughts are connected to these incentives: Metallists think that money is valuable as long as it has gold (or silver, or copper, etc.) content or it is convertible to gold at a ﬁxed rate; Chartallists think that the power of the state gives value to the money: if it is not only possible but obligatory to pay taxes in banknotes, then it creates demand for the new currency (for details, see Bell, 2001).
The perceptive reader can observe the sentence “I promise to pay the Bearer on Demand the sum of Ten shillings.” on the English 10 shilling banknote (Figure 9). Once it meant the 		 18mutual guarantee of the Queen / King and the Governor of the Bank of England to redeem this note at sight to 10 shillings worth of gold. The nature of this promise has changed over time: today it means that the State and the Central Bank guarantee to safeguard the purchasing power of money.
FIGURE 9: THE ENGLISH 10 SHILLING BANKNOTE.* 
* Source: worldbanknotescoins.com
The introduction of the new paper currency initiated signiﬁcant changes within the banking system. Ordinary banks gradually substituted their gold coin reserves with banknotes issued by the central bank, which was rationalised by the convertibility of  banknotes to gold coins. As economic agents (and banks as well) could redeem paper currency to gold at the central bank, it was enough for the banks to hold the central bank’s banknotes as reserves. If costumers wanted to convert their promissory notes issued by some bank to gold, they could do it in two steps: ﬁrst, they applied for redemption to the issuer of the promissory note, then they could convert the given banknotes to gold at the central bank. 
For the recommendation of the central bank, members of the banking system made their costumers use checking accounts instead of promissory notes, thus promissory notes gradually vanished from circulation. A checking account is a liability of a bank that can be used for withdrawing cash (central bank notes in our case) or, with the help of a checkbook, for buying goods. In the latter case, the account holder gives a signed preprinted check to the seller of the good. Later, the seller can turn in the check to his own bank who deposits the amount written on the check on the seller’s account. 
Example: checking accounts 1 “A” has a checking account at bank “X”, and “B” has a checking account at bank “Y”. “B” buys goods from “A” for 13 shillings and pays with a check. “A” turns in the check to bank “X”, who deposits 13 shillings on “A”’s account then contacts bank “Y”. “Y” debits “B”’s account with 13 shillings and pays bank “X” in banknotes. See Figure 10 for accounting. 
		 19
FIGURE 10: SETTLING BUSINESS WITH CHECKING ACCOUNTS. 
Example: checking accounts 2 Suppose that there are 5 banks in the economy, X1, X2, X3, X4, and X5. By the end of some business day, the banks have collected checks from their costumers according to the table below (Table 1). 
TABLE 1: BILATERAL GROSS POSITIONS OF BANKS BEFORE SETTLEMENT.  
Checks written by the customers of a given bank are in the rows of the table, while those given to them are in the columns. The amounts in the diagonal are checks written by and given to costumers of the same bank, while other cells are containing checks written by and given to customers of two diﬀerent banks. The amount 1,976 in the fourth cell of the ﬁrst row thus means that at the end of the day, bank X1 is due to pay 1,976 shillings in banknotes to X4 (or X4 is due from X1 1,976 shillings). The sum of all the numbers in the table is the total nominal value of the real economic transactions settled by checks. This amount is 109,196 shillings. Instead of paying the gross amounts, the banks ﬁrst net out their dues and pay according to their net positions (see Table 2). 
The due to bank X1 (22,355 shillings) is the sum of the ﬁrst column of Table 1, the due from X1 (22,337 shillings) is the sum of the ﬁrst row. X1’s net position is 18 shillings, which is a claim on other banks. X3’s net position is -4,342 shillings, which is a debt payable to other banks. The sum of the net positions is zero, as someone’s revenue is always someone else’s expenditure. The sum of net cash ﬂows is 9,494 shillings which is less by a factor of 11 than the amount of gross cash ﬂows (109,196) would have been. (9,494 is the absolute value of debts [4,342+5,152] or claims [18+916+8,560].)
      A     Bgoods, -13 goods, +13checking account, +13checking account, -13       Bank XBank Ybanknotes, -13A’s account, -13banknotes, +13B’s account, +13
X1X2X3X4X5X13 9126 0214 7001 9765 728X25 1106 2302 9187 5041 635X31 1329078 7026 4827 203X43 3748 3204393 800854X58 8272 8353 3255 5851 677
		 20TABLE 2: GROSS AND NET POSITIONS OF THE BANKS. 
The ﬁnal settlement among the banks can be arranged in two ways. Either debtors (X3 and X5) put the proper amounts in a box from where creditors (X1, X2, and X4) can take their claims, or they can ask the central bank to debit and credit their accounts. Having accounts at the central bank is another ﬁnancial innovation that helps payments between members of the banking system. 
FIGURE 11: FINAL SETTLEMENT USING CENTRAL BANK ACCOUNTS. 
Figure 11 shows the net result of payments and settlements. At the banking level, individual costumers’ accounts are credited and debited according to the checks turned in.
With the foundation of the central bank, a hierarchical monetary system evolved (Mehrling, 2013). On the top level of this hierarchy, the central bank serves as the bank of the crown (the state) and of other banks. Gold currency is still the highest form of money, but now it has started to lose its function of medium of exchange, as economic agents use either banknotes or checking accounts for the payments. The liabilities of the central bank (banknotes and current accounts of other banks) are the second highest forms of money, while checking accounts at banks are the third, commercial bills are the fourth in Due toDue fromNet positionX122 35522 33718X224 31323 397916X320 08424 426-4 342X425 34716 7878 560X517 09722 249-5 152
Bank X1central bank account, +18costumers’ accounts, +18Bank X2Central Bankcentral bank account, +916costumers’ accounts, +916X1’s account, +18Bank X3X2’s account, +916central bank account, -4,342costumers’ accounts, -4,342X3’ account, -4,342Bank X4X4’s account, +8,560central bank account, +8,560costumers’ accounts, +8,560X5’s account, -5,152Bank X5central bank account, -5,152costumers’ accounts, -5,152
		 21this row. The second level of the institutional hierarchy is composed of the banks who keep banknotes and central bank accounts as reserves, and their liabilities (checking accounts) fulﬁl the role of medium of exchange in the economy. Though in a constrained manner, certain liabilities (commercial bills) of real economic agents can substitute higher forms of money in the function of exchange. (See Figure 12 for accounting details.) 
FIGURE 12: THE HIERARCHICAL MONETARY SYSTEM. 
The ultimate phase in the evolution of this system was the suspension of convertibility of banknotes to gold, which was triggered by a series of monetised budget deﬁcits. As mentioned at the beginning of this section, the crown founded the central bank in order to create an institution at hand who willingly ﬁnances current deﬁcits and maturing debts. The method of ﬁnancing is the purchase of treasury bonds issued by the state. The central bank buys these bonds by printing banknotes, by which the state gains purchasing power to spend. As long as the additional money supply does not exceed the money demand generated by economic growth, this can be considered a proper and rightful procedure (Bánﬁ-Hagelmayer, 1989). It is worth to notice that whenever a private agent borrows from a bank, who grants the loan by issuing promissory notes or depositing the checking account, technically the same thing happens: some deﬁcit is ﬁnanced by newly created money. Considering the special relationship between the state Central BankStategold coinsbanknotestreasury bondsbanks’ accountstreasury bondsloans to banksBanksbanknotescentral bank loanscentral bank accountcostumers’ accountscommercial billsloansPrivate Sectorbanknotesbank accountscommercial billscommercial billsloans
		 22and the central bank, however, the two cases are not identical. Private agents face strict rules, they are screened, monitored, asked for collateral, and their loans are priced properly, whereas ﬁnancing the state by the central bank does not involve such scrutiny. If a private debt matures, in most cases, it has to be repaid, whereas a maturing public debt can easily be rolled over. 
The diﬀerences might be explained by the monopoly right to issue legal tender, a privilege the crown has given to the central bank. Holding the highest level of liabilities in the monetary hierarchy generates proﬁtable business for the central bank, which is lending money to other banks facing liquidity shortage. A liquidity problem arises at the second level of the banking system when too many customers want to withdraw money by either having commercial bills discounted, or redeeming promissory notes or checking accounts into central bank notes, or when the bank is unable to settle at the end of the clearing process. In all of these cases, a short-term liquidity loan from the central bank can solve the bank’s problem. As the central bank is the monopolistic supplier of legal tender notes, it can charge high interest rates for these loans. (Remember, the central bank was founded by private businessmen, so originally and for a long time thereafter, it was a proﬁt-seeking entity.)
Public deﬁcit ﬁnanced by the central bank threatens this business by increasing the quantity of banknotes in circulation and can lead to growing prices in the economy. Inﬂation is partially caused by the direct spending of the state, and partially by a credit bubble generated by the loosening monetary conditions. As we have seen in the example about the checking accounts and the clearing system, 1 unit of central bank money can generate transactions in multiple units of value. Consequently, an additional unit of banknote created by the central bank, spent by the state and deposited by an economic agent in a bank, can generate multiple units of money on checking accounts. On the basis of the additional reserve, banks can lend more without having to worry about their own liquidity. The macroeconomic demand is increased through two channels: both the state and private agents can ﬁnance their excessive spending by debt. The state spends central bank money directly, private agents spend the money created by members of the banking system on the basis of the additional liquidity spent by the state. 
If macroeconomic supply cannot adapt to macroeconomic demand, prices start to increase. What private agents see in this situation is that the purchasing power of their checking accounts or banknotes is falling. As checking accounts are redeemable to banknotes, and banknotes are still convertible to gold coins, and the nominal gold content of banknotes, so the price of gold is unchanged, more and more agents will turn their balances at banks into banknotes, and banknotes at the central bank into gold coins. As banknotes are created, the possibility of converting deposits (checking accounts) into banknotes is (with the help of the central bank) inﬁnite, however, as the gold reserves of the central bank are ﬁnite, convertibility on the highest level of the hierarchy sooner or later must be suspended. 
		 23Historically, excessive public deﬁcit and debt led to the suspension of convertibility. However regarding that the money demand of the growing economy can only be met with money-creation, sooner or later the gap between the gold-reserves of the banking system and the amount of the outstanding money-of-account would have been so huge, that convertibility could not have been hold. 
2.4 Modern monetary systems The monetary system evolved by the end of this (imagined) story is similar to the monetary systems operating in modern economies. There are some diﬀerences, of course. Central banks cannot ﬁnance the state directly anymore, although they can trade with treasury bonds on the secondary market, i.e. they can buy and sell treasuries that have been already issued. Instead of gold, the most important monetary reserves held by central banks are key currencies, such as the US Dollar, the Euro or the British Pound. Convertibility of national currencies is the possibility of exchanging them to other currencies, especially to those listed above.
The convertibility of the home currency to foreign currencies constrains the ease with which the public deﬁcit and debt can be (re)ﬁnanced per se. Although technically the central bank can still help serving the debt by creating money, as this money is convertible to foreign currency, the excessive debt can easily lead to a currency crises. 
Industrial and technological development has changed the payments and settlements systems. Economic agents holding deposit accounts in banks are using plastic cards instead of checkbooks. However, the essence of a payment between trading partners is still the parallel settlement. If “A” pays “B” - except for the case when they are the costumers of the same bank - two payments are generated simultaneously. The account of “A” is debited by his bank, and the account of “B” is credited by her bank; and parallel with this payment, central bank money ﬂows between the accounts of the two banks (Figure 13).
The transaction between “A” and “B” is successful if two conditions are fulﬁlled. First, the budget constraint is held, that is, “A” needs to have enough money on his account to pay for the goods or services provided by “B”. Second, the liquidity constraint is held, that is, “A”’s bank needs to have enough central bank money on its account to pay “B”’s bank. 
On the international level, a single payment generally needs more than one liquidity conditions to hold. If a Mexican supplier sells tequila to a Hungarian liquor-store, there are three parallel payments: (1) the store pays the supplier, (2) the Hungarian commercial bank pays the Mexican commercial bank; (3) the Hungarian central bank pays the Mexican central bank. There are other possibilities to settle this business, but discussing them is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Task: account for the international payment discussed above.
		 24FIGURE 13: PARALLEL SETTLEMENT. 
Money is created by the members of the banking system in three ways:
•by granting loans either in a non-securitised or in a securitised form, •by buying foreign exchange, •by buying securities on the secondary market (i.e. issued securities). In all of these cases, the bank credits the current account of its costumer with the proper amount (i.e., with the amount of the loan, with the price of the foreign exchange or the securities bought; see Figure 14). The customer might be a household or a company. In these cases, a commercial bank from the second level of the banking system creates money. However, the costumer might be a commercial bank as well, in this case, it is the central bank who creates money. Out of the three methods of money creation, buying foreign exchange and buying securities are secondary. Foreign exchange is primarily created by foreign banks, by granting a loan, securities represent the debts of some economic agents. Ultimately, every unit of money is created through the indebtedness of someone.
FIGURE 14: THE THREE WAYS OF MONEY CREATION.   Central Bank- Bank X’s account+ Bank Y’s account   Bank X        Bank Y- central bank account- A’s account+ central bank account+ B’s account   A          B+ goods- goods- bank account+ bank account
CustomerBank+ Money+ Loan+ Loan+ Money+ Money+ Foreign exchange+ Money- Foreign exchange+ Money+ Securities+ Money- Securities		 25When the reverse of these actions happens, i.e. a customer repays a bank loan, buys foreign exchange or securities from a bank, money is destroyed. 
Task: account for the reverse case!
Commercial banks can create only “money of account”, whereas the central bank can create cash (banknotes and coins) as well. It is rare, however, that a bank applies to the central bank for a loan granted in cash. Instead, the central bank credits the account of the bank that can be converted later into cash. Cash and central bank accounts of banks diﬀer from each other only in their physical form, as they are both the liabilities of the central bank. 
Creating money is not constrained technically, however, it generates liquidity risk, as additional deposits might be withdrawn at any time. Commercial banks manage this risk by diﬀerent protective measures. First of all, they hold cash reserves and deposits at the central bank. These are the highest forms of liquidity as costumers can redeem their deposits into cash directly or into central bank accounts indirectly through the payments system. Commercial banks can, and in most cases do, hold short-term treasury bills. T-bills are liquid securities that can easily be sold on the interbank market or used as a collateral for an interbank loan or for a central bank loan. 
Task: account for a liquidity loan on the interbank market!
There is an important diﬀerence between borrowing money from another bank and requiring liquidity from the central bank. Banks can provide liquidity only to the extent of their excess reserves, whereas the ability of the central bank to create reserves is theoretically inﬁnite. Because of this, the central bank is the ultimate liquidity backstop in the banking system, frequently called the lender of last resort. To avoid moral hazard problems – e. g. when banks do not care about their liquidity because the central bank can always help –, this role must be regulated. According to Bagehot’s Rules (Bagehot, 1873), named after Walter Bagehot, an English businessman of the 19th century, the central bank should: •provide liquidity freely (without hesitation) to solvent banks, •at sound collateral, •at a high interest rate. Liquidity provision is important because a failure in the payments system could lead to a chain reaction and to a full-ﬂedged systemic crisis. Banks and economic agents are interlocked through their balance sheets, so if “A” cannot pay to “B” because of a liquidity shortage at “A”’s bank, then “B” cannot pay “C”, “C” cannot pay “D”, and so on. However, it must be controlled for whether the bank has only mismanaged its short-term cash ﬂows, i.e. it could not match cash (reserve) outﬂows with inﬂows temporarily, or it has an outstanding problem in the long run, i.e. it is insolvent. In the latter case, the bank will apply for liquidity again and again because its assets are worth less than its liabilities. The “sound collateral”, in most cases, consists of some government security, however, in a wider sense any good quality asset can be referred to by this term. High interest rate on 		 26the liquidity loan is required to have the bank feel the consequence of its mismanagement. 
Every economic agent can provide money-redistributing loans, i.e. lend out money accumulated as an asset (Figure 15). This is - typically - a loan between the members of the same level of the monetary system, where the money lent had been created by an institution of some higher level before. A household, for example, can lend cash created by the central bank or money from its bank account (created by a bank) to another household or to a company. A bank can lend money from its central bank account to another bank. Money-creating loans are provided between levels of the monetary system, i.e. a bank can provide a loan by creating a bank deposit to a household or a company, or the central bank can grant a loan by creating a central bank deposit (or cash) to a bank. Money-redistributing and money-creating loans diﬀer technically: the former restructures the asset side of the creditor whereas the latter increases both the assets and the liabilities of the creditor (Riesz, 1980). Another diﬀerence is that providing money-redistributing loans is constrained by the amount of money the creditor has, while money-creating loans can be (technically) granted inﬁnitely. 
FIGURE 15: PROVIDING A MONEY-REDISTRIBUTING LOAN. Markets to provide liquidity are created on several levels of the monetary system, by deﬁcit and surplus agents. Amounts paid for shipments in wholesale trade can be large enough not to let them rest on suppliers’ accounts but to be tied up in the form of short-term deposits or short-term securities. Banks must be ready to provide solutions for surplus agents’ problems (i.e. excess liquidity) in the short run because, on the other hand, deﬁcit agents (for instance, ﬁrms who have to ﬁnance their production before they could realise revenues from sales) apply for liquidity loans. When a loan is granted, money is created and serves as the liquidity of the debtor. Thus, the bank does not lend out its own reserves, but when the debtor spends this money, reserves are pumped out of the bank. This liquidity, as mentioned above, can be re-borrowed on the interbank market, however, it is better if it comes back indirectly or even does not leave the bank. If some costumer of Bank A deposits excess money balances in Bank B then a reserve ﬂow between the two banks is generated. In this wise, banks can compete for liquidity by creating attractive saving instruments. It is worth to emphasise that the subject of this competition is not the deposit itself. Deposits are liabilities of banks, and who wants to be liable? It is the additional liquidity – generated by the excess deposits – that the banks compete for,  so that they can lend more on its ground. 
Task: account for a bank loan in the next two cases:
➡ﬁrst, the business partner of the debtor is the costumer of another bank;
➡second, the business partner of the debtor is the costumer of the same bank.
DebtorCreditor+ Money+ Loan- Money+ Loan
		 27Considering these two cases, how can the bank decrease liquidity outﬂows generated by lending?
At the given level of available ﬁnancial techniques and management skills the banks can estimate the secure ratio between their liquidity reserves and deposits. This ratio is not static, it can be inﬂuenced by the business cycle or by events in the calendar year. In recessions, for example, economic agents keep more cash, thus banks need to increase their reserves. Or around Christmas cash-usage is more frequent, making the banks once again keep more liquidity. Let alone these considerations, the supposed secure ratio of liquidity reserves determines how much money banks can create by lending. This ratio is well below 1, which leads to money multiplication: if the central bank creates one unit of central bank money (which serves as the reserve of banks), then banks can create multiple units of deposits according to the secure reserve ratio. The following examples shed light on money multiplication. 
Suppose that Bank X calculates that the secure ratio between its reserves and deposits is 10%. If at the moment the bank has 100 units of reserves and 800 units of deposits, then it can create by lending 200 more units of deposits without having to worry about liquidity problems. 
Suppose that in the banking system the average of secure reserve ratios calculated by individual banks is 10%. If at the moment the banking system has 10,000 units of reserves and 70,000 units of deposits, then on the systemic level 30,000 more units of deposits can be created by lending. 
Suppose that in the banking system the average of secure reserve ratios calculated by individual banks is 10%. At the moment the banking system has 10,000 units of reserves and 100,000 units of deposits, thus at the given level of reserves no more deposit creation is possible on the systemic level. However, if the central bank creates 500 more units of reserves by lending central bank money to the members of the banking system, it allows the creation of 5,000 more units of deposits. 
The driving force behind the evolution of monetary systems has always been some problem that was solved by a formal, a procedural or an institutional innovation of proﬁt seeking individuals (Table 3) or by the state. But even the state pursued selﬁsh goals when introduced changes without the intention to manage some systemic imperfection. Still, the interplay of all these microlevel (re)solutions eﬀected a system that fulﬁls two macroeconomic functions, namely providing the possibility of payments and settlements and connecting savings with investments. 
		 28TABLE 3: EVOLUTION OF MONETARY SYSTEMS. monetary systemproblemssolutionsformalinstitutionalproceduralbarter*ineﬃcient, probability of double coincident of wants is lowgenerally accepted means of exchangecommodity money (gold coins)practical: wears oﬀ, insecure, heavypromissory notes in exchange for gold coinsdepository institutionspromissory note - gold coin conversioneconomic: relative money shortagepromissory notes in exchange for the promise of repaymentbankscreation of promissory notes by lending
gold coins   promissory notes (ﬁduciary money) created by bankspublic deﬁcit and debtbanknotescentral bankﬁnancing the state by issuing banknotespractical: promissory notes and banknotes are seemingly identicalchecking accounts (replacing promissory notes)clearing systemclearingcentral bank accounts of banks(possible) liquidity shortage of bankscentral bank lending according to the Bagehot rulesgold coins         checking accounts created by banks banknotes created by the central bank inﬂation caused by overrissuance of banknotessuspension of banknotes - gold coins convertibilityindependent central bank (no deﬁcit ﬁnancing)two level banking system                central bank money bank depositsasset price bubbles caused by loose credit conditions                         procyclical banking behaviour                            too big and too important to fail problems**uniting central banks and prudential authorities                  Bank Union (EU)           international supervisory bodiesintroduction of Basel III rules* never existed** discussing these issues is beyond the scope of this book		 29The ﬁnancial position of an agent can be deﬁned as the diﬀerence between its incomes and expenditures in a given time period. As someone’s income is simultaneously someone else’s expenditure, the aggregated ﬁnancial position of all economic units is always zero ex post, which gives rise to perfect ﬁnancial intermediation, i.e. deﬁcits can be ﬁnanced by surpluses completely. However, the preferences of surplus and deﬁcit agents diﬀer by more dimensions. The typical deﬁcit agent is a private business who wants to fund investments in physical capital. The typical surplus agent is a household, who saves some part of its monthly income. Capital investments pay oﬀ expectedly in the long run, sometimes with non negligible risk of default. Households save for the short run, and they are typically risk-averse, i.e. they fear loosing even a tiny part of their savings. All these diﬀerences make it almost impossible to connect savers with investors directly.
The loanable funds theory states that ﬁnancial intermediaries collect savings and fund investments thereby connecting surplus agents with deﬁcit agents. It is easy to see, that there is a logical error in this claim if we want to apply it on the macroeconomic level. To fund deﬁcit agents, the intermediaries - according to this theory - must collect the surpluses ﬁrst. However, the surpluses are the results of excessive spending of deﬁcit agents, who cannot spend until they borrowed these surpluses. The intermediary cannot lend something now that can be only collected later. 
The banking system that creates money provides solution both to the problem of connecting savers with investors and to this logical error. It is enough to take a look at the balance sheet of a bank to see how the funding problem is solved. The bulk of the loans granted by the bank are long term investment loans, whereas the bulk of the deposits are sight deposits and time deposits maturing at most in one or two years. The bank separates the credit risk of the debtors from the liquidity risk of the depositors by holding capital reserves and liquidity reserves on the two sides of its balance sheet. In normal circumstances the expected liquidity loss and the expected capital loss are low, thus the bank can keep the liquidity reserves to deposit ratio and the capital reserves to loans ratio around 10-20% (see Figure 15).
FIGURE 15: THE BALANCE SHEET OF A TYPICAL BANK IN NORMAL CIRCUMSTANCES. The dynamics of this balance sheet are as follows. 
➡money creation by lending: loans and deposits increase ➡destroying money when the loan is repaid: loans and deposits decrease ➡realisation of credit risk: loans and capital decrease ➡realisation of liquidity risk: deposits and liquidity decrease BankLiquidity reserves  10Deposits                 85Loans                    90Capital reserves     15
		 30Figures 16A and 16B help to understand how the banking system connects deﬁcit agents with surplus agents through money creation. First, the banking system grants loans to surplus agents by creating deposits (money). Next, deﬁcit agents spend this money and buy goods from surplus agents. This spending is the income of surplus agents, which until spent is by deﬁnition their savings. At the end the investments (loans) of deﬁcit agents are ﬁnanced by the savings (deposits) of surplus agents, the banking system intermediates between them, however the deposits were not collected but created.
FIGURE 16A: FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION IN THE BANKING SYSTEM. 
FIGURE 16B: THE RESULT OF THE FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION. Deﬁcit AgentsBanking systemSurplus Agents+Deposit+ Loan+ Loan+Deposit-Money-Deposit-Goods+Goods+Deposit+DepositDeﬁcit AgentsBanking systemSurplus Agents+Goods+ Loan+ Loan+Deposit+Deposit-Goods
		 31Bibliography Bagehot, Walter (1873): “Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market.” Henry S. King & Co., London.
Bánﬁ, Tamás - Hagelmayer, István (1989): “Pénzelmélet és pénzügypolitika” (“Theory of Money and Monetary Policy”). Közgazdasági és Jogi Könyvikadó, Budapest. 
Bell, Stephanie (2001): “The role of the state and the hierarchy of money.” The Cambridge Journal of Economics, 25, pp.: 149-163
Bordo, Michael D. - Jonung, Lars (1987): “The long-run behavior of the velocity of circulation: The international evidence”, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Mehrling, Perry (2013): “The inherent hierarchy of money.” In: Social fairness and economics: economic essays in the spirit of Duncan Foley. London, Routledge, pp.: 394-404
Mises, Ludwig von (1912): “The Theory of Money and Credit.” Available at: https://mises-media.s3.amazonaws.com/Theory%20of%20Money%20and%20Credit.pdf?ﬁle=1&type=document
Polányi, Károly (1944): “The Great Transformation. The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time”. Beacon Press, Boston.
Polányi, Károly (1957): “The semantics of money uses.” In: Dalton, G. (ed): “Primitive, archaic and modern economies: essays of Karl Polanyi”, Garden City, Doubleday. pp.: 175-190
Riesz, Miklós (1980): “Pénzforgalom és hitel” (“Money Circulation and Credit”). Tankönyvkiadó, Budapest
Vidovics-Dancs, Ágnes (2014): “Az államcsőd költségei régen és ma” (“Costs of sovereign defaults now and long ago”). Közgazdasági Szemle, LXI., March, pp.: 262-278.
Wray, Randall L. (1993): “The Origins of Money and the Development of the Modern Financial System”. Levy Institute, Working Paper No. 86
		 32CHAPTER 3 BANKING OPERATIONS 3.1 Passive banking oparations The expression of passive banking transactions derives from the early stage of bank history, when their main activity was custody services, for which a fee was charged. At that time banks were really condemned to passivity, so this name became widespread. Even today, the operations that modify the extent and composition of liabilities – regardless of the fact that they express debts and liabilities – are called “passive” 
Deposits Deposits create the suitable liabilities for banks, which the credit and other income-generating activities are based on. The credit institutions’ own funds perform only security functions.
Deposits are distinguished according to the right of disposal:
•bearer deposit, •registered deposits. Bearer deposit are unanimous, the holder of the proper documents can dispose over the deposited amount. In case of registered deposits only the depositor and his/her representative may have disposal of registered deposits.
According to the currency of the deposit:
•in domestic currency, •in foreign exchange, currency. In terms of repayment period:
•short (shorter than a year) term, •medium- (between 1 and 5 years) term, •long- (longer than 5 years) term.  According to interests: 
•ﬁxed, •variable, •convertible rate, •formally non-interest bearing deposits. We talk about ﬁxed rates if during the repayment period the size of the interest rate is deﬁned in advance. In case of variable-rate deposits the initial interest rate is bound to some kind of reference rate (e.g. key interest rate) and the initial interest rate is changed during maturity only in case of its change. In case of variable-rate deposits the bank may change the initial interest rate unilaterally under certain conditions. Formally non-interest bearing deposits are the discount liabilities.
According to the maturity of deposits:
•demand deposit, •deposits redeemable at notice, •term deposit. In case of demand deposits, the depositor disposes of the account without any restrictions at any time without loss of interest. The transfer of this amount is uncertain for the credit institution; therefore very low interest rate is paid on them. Deposits redeemable at notice are transition between demand deposits and term deposits. The client may terminate the deposit at any time but the credit institution has to aﬀect the order only after a certain time (usually three days) depending on the contract. Term deposits cannot be withdrawn maturity, or only at the price of losing interest.
		 33The payment account or simply bank account is used for the execution of payment transactions. Payment accounts are on the liabilities side of the bank balance, just as deposits. However, while in case of the deposit, the amount of the deposit is only for the disposal of funds (due to this fact the turnover of the deposit is small), the payment account is used for the transactions of the account holder.
If this account the bank accomplishes overpayment in addition to the balance, i.e. grants credit to the client, the account is called current account. The size of the available credit which can be taken automatically, without a separate application, is usually a certain percentage of the account balance (relative limit) or a speciﬁc amount limit (absolute limit).
The bank account management does not only mean booking incomes and expenses of the account merely, but a range of other related services are also included. For example, management of general ledger accounts, holding the disposal of the account holder credits granted on the current account, the so-called overdrafts, check and bill of exchange transactions, management of separate accounts, statistical report management for the monetary authorities, etc.
So if the account management is not too promising to the banks, the expected opportunity of connected transactions makes this banking transaction attractive for them after all. The interest beneﬁt is added to this if the bank does not pay interest on the account balance. It mainly occurs in countries with low inﬂation rate.
Issue of securities Besides taking deposits, the emission of the bank’s own securities is a growing way of funds raising. Issuing of short-term securities generally has a liquidity motive, therefore their majority has a maturity of 90, 180 and 270 days. Many varieties of short-term securities are known, such as savings certiﬁcates, bills, etc. In general, they are ﬁxed rate ones, but rarely ﬂexible rate ones also occur. Interest payments are usually made at maturity, however, issuing on discount price is also known. Certiﬁcates of deposit bridge the gap between the short-term and long-term securities. The aim is the acquisition of sources aiming at ﬁnancing permanent current assets with the emission of middle-term securities.
The purpose of issuing long-term securities is ﬁnancing long-term investments. Its most widespread forms are bonds, savings certiﬁcates and letter of hypothecation.
The savings certiﬁcate can be bearer or registered, ﬁxed or ﬂoating rate, or with bound denomination. In most cases, interest is paid at maturity, as compound interest. The savings certiﬁcate can be found in discount variations, as well. It is not possible to withdraw money from the note principal prior to the expiration.
The letter of hypothecation is ﬁxed-rate security, of which coverage is created by lien on property. It makes possible to meet the lasting demand for credit of the agricultural and construction industries. Behind the letter of hypothecation there is therefore a land and real estate collateral, so the owner’s claim is insured not only by the repayment promise of the credit institution but also by the collateral.
The great beneﬁt of securities emission is that if the investor needs his capital earlier than it was excepted, it is not needed to be redeemed at the issuing credit institution, but it can be sold in the secondary securities market. It can provide long-term resources for the credit institutions without having to be afraid of repayment prematurely.
Central bank loans If short- or long-term lack of resources arises at credit institutions, they can turn to the central bank for a reﬁnancing loan. Banks can obtain collateralised loans only by depositing eligible securities at the central bank. The owner of the securities is still the commercial bank, so the amount of credit received for it increases the balance sheet total. Central bank money enters the asset side and there central bank credit (liabilities) enters the liability side.
		 34The so-called repo transactions can be regarded as collateralised loans as well. Their essence is that the business bank sells eligible securities to the central bank and and agrees to repurchase them at a predetermined price at a predetermined future date. Thus the repo is the combination of a spot selling and a forward buying of the same security. The diﬀerence between the spot and the future price reﬂects the repo rate. In case of a reverse repo the bank buys spot and sell forward the same securities.
In case of rediscounting the central bank purchases bills discounted by banks earlier.
In case of loans oﬀered beside foreign exchange coverage, the business bank takes out a loan in domestic cash equivalents to the amount of its foreign exchange deposit (which is its collateral at the central bank). Foreign exchange-swap transaction can be mentioned here, when the business bank sells a kind of foreign exchange to the central bank for another particular foreign exchange, and the business bank repurchases it simultaneously for a speciﬁc period, on a predetermined rate. So, in practice, it means a spot purchase and a forward selling, or the other way round, spot selling and forward purchase. T
Interbank borrowing Compared to the corporate sector, the short-term liquidity in the banking sector should meet much more severe requirements. Companies and individuals can be some days late with their dues without a relatively greater risk, illiquidity of a bank can lead to a panic attack among depositors.
Therefore, banks often have to take intraday loans from each other in order to ensure their liquidity. Interbank credits have some basic specialties  compared to the corporate credit market.
In general, the vast majority of interbank loans is short-term: 
•overnight loans, where the conclusion of the contract and taking out the loan happen on the same day, the repayment of the loan is a working day later.  •tomnext (tomorrow-next), when the borrowing takes place one day after the conclusion, and the loan repayment the day after  •spotnext, where the granting of credit happens two days after the contract has been made. Of course, the participants of the interbank market may reach an agreement about any kinds of constructions. Thus, interbank loans actually have no time limit, but due to the high interest rates, they are mainly used in case of liquidity problems, for a few days duration.
The second feature lies in the technique of contracting. While in case of corporate loans, literacy has an almost exclusive role, here oral agreements dominate, and technically it is followed by contracting written on-line, or by fax or other channels.
The third particularity is that there is no insurance behind the interbank transactions. It is explained by the short duration of transactions and the conﬁdence of credit institutions in one another. Banks defend themselves against the risk by creating inner credit limits, in as much the bank oﬀering the credit sets up limits, according to maturity types, based on the size of the partner asking for credit, its reliability so far, its creditability, banking regulation, etc. The limits can be diﬀerent on the diﬀerent levels of bank management.
Finally, a special feature of the interbank market is that trends in interest rates are much more erratic than in the corporate market. In case of tight liquidity market situation, since the borrower has to keep its liquidity in any case, a really high interest rate level may occur (of course its daily interest burden is bearable due to the short duration), while in broad liquidity periods the level of interbank interest rates may fall very low.
The best-known international interbank interest rate is LIBOR (London Interbank Oﬀered Rate), which is the interest rate provided for ﬁrst-class banks in the London interbank market. Its deposit equivalent is LIBID. International loans are provided in LIBOR + risk premium type of 		 35constructions, where the risk premium covers the risk between the given borrower and a ﬁrst-class bank in London.
3.2 Active banking operations Active operations of banks are those providing loans to customers directly or indirectly. In case of a direct loan the bank contracts its debtor and provides the contracted funds directly on the debtors account. In case of indirect loans the bank contracts with a third party, i.e. a mediatory who contracts with the ultimate user of the provided funds. 
Credits are classiﬁed into three groups based upon their economic content.
➡We talk about money credit if the client obtains the amount of credit based on a credit application according to the classical rules of lending.
The bank maintains a credit limit at the other party’s disposal for a commission Its essence is that the debtor can take out the loan in whole or in parts, automatically, at any time at his own discretion within a speciﬁc period. We talk about a loan if the client takes out a speciﬁed amount of money from his bank based on the loan contract, and he assumes an obligation to pay it back together with interests.
➡We talk about credit-like lending, if the bank grants credit not on the basis of credit application but due to any other legal relationship, for example joins in discounting bills of exchange, factoring happens, etc.
A typical type of credit like loan is the commodity credit. The debtor selects the suitable product, enters into the loan agreement (nowadays, in most of the cases it can be done at the place of purchase), and he can leave with the goods. The duration of the credit can be short-, medium- and long-term.
➡In case of commitment credit the credit institution does not grant the amount immediately but only assumes an obligation that in the future it will fulﬁl its borrowing obligation under certain conditions. Such transactions are for example guarantee, letter of credit or credit availability.
Credit types according to the character of the coverage:
•collateral loans, •non collateral loans (blank credit). We talk about collateral loans if the ownership of any of the receiving party’s assets (land, real estate, equipments and even amounts on the debtor’s bank account) is transferred to the bank, in case the receiving party cannot repay the loan as agreed. Such lending has a relatively low risk, as the bank secures itself against non-payment. The bank has to value the collateral properly The credit is 100% covered if the value of the asset oﬀered as coverage is equal to the amount of the debt.
In case a default a problem still can occur, if the bank cannot turn the asset into cash or at a lower price than the market value. Thus the bank usually applies a cut on the value of the collateral, and provides the loan accordingly. The Loan To Value (LTV) measure shows the ratio of the provided loan to the value of the collateral.
It is also conceivable, however, that the credit is only partially collateralised, i.e. the object pledged as collateral is worth less than the amount to be repaid. The bank is in the worst situation when the credit is an uncovered credit, namely no asset is transferred to the ownership of the bank if the debtor does not pay. Banks are trying to avoid the provision of these loans.
Banks have to face a wide range of risk with credits: the risk of changing interest rates or of economic conditions, non-payment, fraud, the debtor’s bankruptcy prospects, etc. They try to reduce these risks somehow. As we have seen, one way to guard against the interest rates and economic conditions is that not ﬁxed but variable interest rates are applied.
		 36The really serious problem is if the debtor cannot pay for some reason. One of the solutions, as we have seen, the emission of only covered loans, when in case of non-payment the asset pledged as collateral is transferred to the ownership of the bank.
The types of securities are as follows:
•security deposit, •lien, •suretyship, •guarantee. The security deposit is a form of ﬁnancial collaterals. If security deposit is oﬀered for the insurance of an obligation, the holder can satisfy his claim directly from the amount of security deposit in case of non-compliance or non-contractual compliance of the contract. The holder may not use the object of the security deposit, it has to be separated from his assets and it may be used only for the purpose of satisfaction. If the contract signed for the underlying collateral are fully satisﬁed, the security deposit is refunded to the obligor. The security can be marketable and less marketable collateral.
Absolute marketable: cash, government, banking securities, ﬁxed-term foreign exchange or deposits. Less marketable securities are: listed securities, bills of a ﬁrst-class debtor. 
The lien is a physical collateral. Its key objective is that the debtor should provide coverage to satisfy the deferred claims becoming due later, with property tied up in advance. If the debtor is unable to repay his debt, the holder can secure his claim with the realisation of the pledge being used to ensure the claims. Satisfying claims using the pledged item is usually based on a court decision, by way of compulsory execution. After completing the contractual obligations of the debtor, the lien on the pledged item is automatically terminated.
The most common type of lien is the mortgage. To create a mortgage, the pledge agreement is required to be out down in writing and the mortgage is required to be received in a public register (of mortgages). The subject of mortgage may be real estate, vehicles, and tangible assets. In case of real estates, records are done by the Land Registry. The pledged property remains in the possession of the owner, (s)he is intended to use all the while, but he has to ensure the preservation. We know pledge, when the transfer of the pledge is also required in addition to the mortgage contract. The transfer of the pledge can happen to a third person (chattel mortgage holder)
In case of suretyship, the surety is a person, who obliges to pay if the original debtor cannot. If the principal obligation is not enforceable judicially, the surety cannot be enforced, either.
In case of guarantee the bank pays a fee to the guarantor, who secures repayment of the loan if the original debtor defaults. The diﬀerence between the surety and the guarantor is that the former is brought into the business by the the debtor. The guarantee is an independent obligation, which means that it is a payment promise independent from the principal obligation. So it is indiﬀerent why the obliged does not perform, the guarantee is obliged to accomplish if the obligor of the underlying transaction is innocent in the breach of contract.
The price of loans ➡The interest on loans is charged according to the speciﬁed annual interest rate. The types of interest rate have already been discussed in connection with passive banking operations. ➡Potential nominal provision fee should be paid based on the unused amount of the credit limit. Its level is speciﬁed by the bank, usually on an annual basis up to 0-2%. ➡Handling charge is a single one-time fee charged for credit assessment and binding of contract. Its extent compared to the full amount of credit is 0-2%. 		 37➡Credit institutions may charge a credit assessment fee regardless of whether the decision was negative or positive. It is generally a speciﬁc amount. ➡The loan disbursement fee may be charged after signing the loan agreement, at the time of disbursing the loan. It is usually 0-2% of the loan amount. ➡Banks charge an amendment fee in all cases when the client’s ﬁle has to be handled. ➡In case of prepayment fee, the bank charges a commission for the client’s unexpected cash ﬂow due to liquidity and interest risk. ➡In case of guarantees and letters of credit, credit institutions charge annual fees rather than interest rates. The extent is between 0-3%. ➡The payment of risk taking commission occurs in case of purchasing the receivables (factoring), which reduces the amount of money paid to the customer. ➡The bank may oblige the client to the payment of default interest if he does not fulﬁl the current obligation in time. The indicator that includes all costs to be paid on capital is the Annual Percentage Rate (APR). The APR is an internal rate which shows the real expense of the loan, in terms of present value calculation: it is an internal rate, in addition to which the repayable capital and lending fee is equal to the sum of credit reduced by expenses paid by the client to the credit institution at the time of the liquidation. 
So the total charge is the amount to be paid by the borrower based on the credit agreement in addition to the principal amount. Determining the interest rate and contributions of the credit is called credit pricing. First, the base rate is determined, its parts are the cost of liabilities and interest margin. So the minimum credit interest to be paid by the client is the average (of the) interest rates paid for the bank’s liabilities (deposits, reﬁnancing, etc.) and the interest margin. The bank increases the basic interest rate with the interest rate risk premium (due to the position of the client and the transaction).
		 38CHAPTER 4 BANKING RISKS AND REGULATION 4.1 Financial intermediation In order to understand how banks work, it is essential to understand ﬁnancial intermediaries and their role in the economy. The process will be presented in a simpliﬁed way: based on the assumption that money already exists in an economy, the following economic units can be distinguished:
•the state, •companies and •households. Among these economic units several transactions can take place on the goods and money market.  Certain entities may spend more than their revenue (they are in deﬁcit) or may have more revenue than their planned expenditure (they have a surplus).
In the absence of ﬁnancial intermediaries, at ﬁrst sight you would think that the units that have deﬁcit (borrowers) would pair with units that have surplus (lenders). However, some barriers can be identiﬁed: the needs of the borrowers and lenders may be incompatible and even if their needs can be matched, it may still be diﬃcult and expensive. These diﬃculties between the borrowers and lenders can be bridged by ﬁnancial intermediaries.
FIGURE 1. MODERN FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION 
Source: Casu et al (2015) Financial intermediation obviously entails costs, but the costs are lower than those for individual economic entities to directly access each other. Financial intermediaries cover their costs and proﬁts from interest rate spreads between loans and deposits.
4.2 The role of banks and the diﬀerent types of banking The main function of banks is to collect money (deposits) from units in surplus and lend money (loans) to units in deﬁcit. Banks perform a transformation function, with regards to
•size (generally, the amounts needed by the borrowers exceed the amount the lenders are willing to lend), •maturity (generally, funds are lent for a short period of time into medium- or long-term loans), 		 39
•and risk (borrowers carry a risk that they might not be able to repay the amount of money that was lent to them). Initially, banks dealt with core banking operations, taking deposits, making loans and providing a payment mechanism. However, nowadays they conduct a much wider range of activities. Figure 2 provides one possible grouping to understand the diﬀerent types of banking.
FIGURE 2. DIFFERENT TYPES OF BANKING. 
 Source: Arnold (2014)The main characteristics of retail banks and wholesale banks are summarised in Table 1. The fundamental diﬀerences can be observed in the clients, the size and the number of the transactions and in the branch network. Universal banks oﬀer a wide range of commercial and investment banking activities. 
TABLE 1: MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF RETAIL BANKING AND WHOLESALE BANKING. 4.3 Risks faced by banks Risk measures the degree of uncertainty of an expected outcome. There are various types of risks and they originate from diﬀerent situations. Taking into consideration that banks basically deal with others’ money (mainly deposits) and not with their own (equity / bank capital), it is of crucial importance to pay more attention to the banking activities. As a rough breakdown, Table 2 shows the typical liabilities of banks.
retailwholesaleclientshouseholds, small ﬁrms large ﬁrmsnumber and size of transactionsnumerous smallfewer largebranch networkextensiveone or few
		 40TABLE 2: TYPICAL LIABILITIES OF BANKS. 
Source: Arnold (2014)In the event of a bank failure, not only the bank owners, but also the depositors sustain a loss. That is why the depositors have to be protected. Since banking and the banking system are based on trust, a bank failure might trigger a chain-reaction that – in extreme cases – might also jeopardise the stability of the banking system. There are several risks associated with banking activity. Table 3 provides an overview.
TABLE 3. OVERVIEW OF THE MAIN TYPES OF RISK. 
Interest rate risk or interest risk is deﬁned as a negative eﬀect on the cash ﬂow of the bank from changing interest rates. Interest rate risk derives from the case, that the interest rate sensitivity of the bank’s assets and liabilities are diﬀerent. An asset (e.g.: loan) or a liability (e.g.: term deposit) is interest rate sensitive, if the pricing can change during a speciﬁed period. At the expiration of a speciﬁc asset or liability the environment might change and consequently the conditions of the new assets or liabilities also change.
For example, if the bank is ﬁnancing a certain ﬁxed rate asset (e.g.: 5-year maturity, ﬁxed rate mortgage loan) from a ﬂoating rate liability (e.g.: 1 year term deposit), after the expiration of the liability, an increase in interest rates has an unfavourable outcome for the bank’s income. Interest rate risk can be managed by synchronising the expiration time of the certain assets and liabilities. This means that the interest rate sensitive assets are ﬁnanced from interest rate sensitive liabilities.
Interest rate risk can be measured by several methods. One of the simplest risk assessment method is the interest gap analysis. The formula:
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (1)
where:	 GAP: interest rate GAP during the given period
	 	 RSA: interest rate sensitive assets
	 	 RSL: interest rate sensitive liabilities
Proportion of assets (%)Sight deposits (current accounts)10 - 40Time deposits (saving accounts)10 - 50Money market borrowing (repos, interbank)10- 40Bank capital (equity)5 - 15
Risk typeDeﬁnition / Main characteristiccredit riskthe risk that a borrower will fail to meet its obligations in accordance with agreed termsoperational riskthe risk of loss resulting from inadaquate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from other external eventsmarket riskthe risk that the value of an investment will decrease due to changes on the ﬁnancial market / in market factorsliquidity riskthe risk that over a speciﬁc horizon the bank will be unable to settle obligations when duesystemic riskthe risk that an event will trigger a loss of economic value or conﬁdence in a substantial portion of the ﬁnancial system
GAPt=RSAt−RSLt		 41Example: Calculating interest rate risk The GAP Bank’s balance sheet consists of ﬁxed and ﬂoating rate EUR loans and on the liabilities side ﬁxed and ﬂoating rate EUR term deposits. Interest rate income is calculated by the diﬀerence of the interest revenue received from the loans and the interest expenses paid to the depositors.
TABLE 4: BALANCE SHEET OF GAP BANK. 
Assuming, that initially the loan’s interest rate is 10% and the deposit interest rate is 5%, the bank’s income is evaluated by the following method:
As a result of the calculation the interest income of the bank is 25 million EUR.
Using the GAP formula:
 
GAP BankAssets (million EUR)Liabilities (million EUR)Loan (ﬁxed rate)200Deposit (ﬁxed rate)100Loan (ﬂoating rate)300Deposit (ﬂoating rate)400Interest rate incomeAmountInterest rateInterestLoan (ﬁxed)20010%20Loan (ﬂoating)30010%30Sum  50    Interest rate expenses   Deposit (ﬁxed)1005%5Deposit (ﬂoating)4005%20Sum  25    Net income  25RSAt=400,RSLt=300→GAPt=300−400=−100
		 42Assuming that the interest rate increases 100 basis points, the banks interest revenue and expense from ﬁxed rate loan and deposit remains unchanged, however the revenue and expenses from the ﬂoating rate deposit and loan changes, as the table shows below:
In this case the bank’s interest income decreased by 1 million EUR. As a consequence of an interest rate raise the bank’s proﬁt will be lower than initially when the base rate was 5%. The fact that the bank holds more interest rate sensitive assets than liabilities results a decreasing interest income, after raising the base interest rate.
The change of income triggered by the change of the interest rate can be calculated as follows:
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (2)
	 where 	∆y is the change of income, and
	 	 ∆i is the change of the interest rate
In the above example:
 
Table 5 sums up the relation between the GAP and the interest rate risk.
TABLE 5: THE EFFECT OF GAP ON THE INTEREST RATE INCOME. 4.4 Banking regulation Comparing to other companies in the real economy, banks operate with a much higher leverage. Moreover, information asymmetry is also typical for the banks and their customers. Information asymmetry means that the banks and the clients do not have the perfect information about each other. Because of the risks and risky activities the probability of bank failures is high. The avoidance of the bank failure is one of the main purposes of the regulatory authorities. That is why banks have to comply with regulations that essentially relate to capital, liquidity and risk-taking.
Interest rate incomeAmountInterest rateInterestLoan (ﬁxed)20010%20Loan (ﬂoating)30011%33Sum  53    Interest rate expenses   Deposit (ﬁxed)1005%5Deposit (ﬂoating)4006%24Sum  29    Net income  24Δy=Δi*GAPΔi=+1%,GAP=−100→Δy=1%*(−100)=−1 positive GAPnegative GAPincreasing rates+-decreasing rates-+
		 43Banking regulation is complex since it is determined by legal, institutional and cultural factors. Despite of diﬀerent national and regional characteristics, an international cooperation can be observed in banking regulation. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) is the primary global standard setter for the prudential regulation of banks and provides a forum for regular cooperation on banking supervisory matters. Its mandate is to strengthen the regulation, supervision and practices of banks worldwide with the purpose of enhancing ﬁnancial stability. As far as its legal status is concerned, BCBS does not possess any formal supranational authority and its decisions do not have legal force. The BCBS relies on its members' commitments. However, the banking regulation practices of the major economies in the world are generally in line with regulatory packages of the BCBS. These regulatory packages are known as Basel I, Basel II and Basel III. Table 6 illustrates the development of risk measurement in the diﬀerent regulatory packages of BCBS.
TABLE 6: THE EVOLUTION OF RISK MANAGEMENT. 
The Basel Capital Accord of 1988 or simply Basel 1 established an international standard around capital ratio of 8 per cent on credit risk. There are four risk classes in the risk-weighted system related to credit risk exposure. Table 7 summarises the framework for capital adequacy risk weighted assets.
TABLE 7: RISK-ASSET RATIO APPROACH IN BASEL I. 
According to this approach, the banks have to hold a minimum capital that is more than 8% of the total risk-weighted assets (RWA).
This method ignores other types of risk that banks face.
Example: RWA in Basel I Let us take a bank with the following assets in its balance sheet:
•cash: 100 million EUR
•governments bond: 100 million EUR
•interbank loans (loans to other banks): 500 million EUR
•mortgages: 600 million EUR
•commercial loans: 1200 million EUR
Types of riskBasel I (1988)Basel II (2004)Basel III (2010)Credit risk✔✔✔Operational risk✖✔✔Market risk✖✔✔Liquidity risk✖✖✔Systemic risk✖✖✔
Risk classWeightExampleNo risk0%cash, bonds issued by OECD governmentsLow risk20 %short term claimsModerate risk50 %mortgagesStandard risk100 %commercial loans
		 44In this case, the minimum capital ratio should be calculated as follows:
As the value of risk weighted assets is 1600 million EUR the minimum capital the bank must hold is 8% x 1600 million EUR = 128 million EUR.  
Basel II uses a „three pillars” concept:
minimum capital requirementsIt deals with maintenance of regulatory capital calculated for credit risk, operational risk and market risk supervisory review Supervisors are supposed to control the banks’ risk frameworks market disciplineIt encourages eﬀective disclosure about risk exposure, capital adequacy and risk assessment processes Basel II uses a more risk-sensitive approach and the biggest changes relate to the calculation of minimum capital requirements for credit risk. Since market risk and operational risk are taken into consideration in Basel 2, the minimum capital requirements should be calculated as follows (BCBS, 2014):
  The third instalment of the Basel Accords or Basel III was developed in response to the problems in ﬁnancial regulation revealed by the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis. Basel III is intended to strengthen bank capital requirements by increasing bank liquidity and decreasing bank leverage.
Basel III build upon the Basel II three pillar approach and all the pillars are strengthened, especially the ﬁrst pillar due to the enhanced minimum capital and liquidity requirements. Basel III introduced two liquidity ratios:
•Liquidity Coverage Ration (LCR) and •Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). •FIGURE 4. LIQUIDITY AND LEVERAGE RATIOS IN BASEL III.  
AssetsRisk classWeightQuantityrisk-weighted valuecashNo risk0%1000goverments bondNo risk0 %1000interbank loansLow risk20 %500100mortgagesModerate risk50 %600300commercial loansStandard risk100 %12001200
Total capitalCredit risk + Market risk + Operational risk=The bank's capital ratio (8%)
LCR=Stock of high quality liquid assetsTotal net outﬂows over the next 30 calendar days≧100%		 45 
 
Source: BCBS, 2014. There were signiﬁcant changes in banking regulation after the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008. A new regulatory system was established in the European Union after the crisis. The European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS) was introduced in 2010. It consists of: the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) and three European supervisory authorities (ESAs), namely:
•the European Banking Authority (EBA) •the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) •the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA). Whilst the national supervisory authorities remain in charge of supervising individual ﬁnancial institutions, the objective of the European supervisory authorities is to improve the functioning of the internal market by ensuring appropriate, eﬃcient and harmonised European regulation and supervision. Figure 5 provides an overview of the new regulatory system.
FIGURE 5: THE NEW EUROPEAN FRAMEWORK FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY. 
Source: European Economic and Social Committee (2009) The ﬁnancial crisis of 2008 made it clear that the harmonisation of supervisory practices and better coordination among the regulatory agencies is needed. The transformation of the new European framework serves this purpose.
NFSR=Available amount of stable fundingRequired amount of stable funding≧100%Leverage ratio=Capital measureExposure measure
		 46
As far as banking regulation is concerned, the European Banking Authority has an important role. The main task of the EBA is to contribute to the creation of the European Single Rulebook in banking. Its  objective is to provide a single set of harmonised prudential rules for ﬁnancial institutions throughout the European Union. EBA also plays an important role in promoting convergence of supervisory practices and is mandated to assess risks and vulnerabilities in the EU banking sector.
The European Central Bank has also a central role in the new supervisory system. After the crisis, the regulatory approach has changed with regard to central banks. In addition to taking into account price stability considerations, central banks pay more attention to ﬁnancial stability and growth considerations. While the pre-crisis period separated the regulation of individual market players from the market as a whole, macroprudential supervision is aimed at reducing market-level risk for the market as a whole.
Bibliography Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014): “Basel III leverage ratio framework and disclosure requirements.” Available at: https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs270.pdf Casu, B. –  Molyneux, P . – Girardone, C. (2015): “Introduction to Banking”, Pearson, UK. European Economic and Social Committee (2009): “ECO/259 de Larosière Report.” Available at: http://webapi.eesc.europa.eu/documentsanonymous/ces1476-2009_ac_en.doc Glen, A. (2014): “FT Guide to Banking.” Pearson, UK. 
		 47CHAPTER 5 SECURITIES MARKETS 5.1. Basic terms Financial assets or securities (unlike cars and houses) are intangible assets in the sense that their value does not depend on their physical characteristics. Moreover, in most of the cases, they even do not have any physical attributes, since they are electronic, dematerialised. (Some ﬁnancial assets, called certiﬁed securities, are issued in printed form, but the value of these instruments has still no connection with the quality of the paper or the ink.)
Financial assets and securities are not precisely the same; the former term usually refers to a broader group. However, the legal deﬁnitions may vary by countries, and discussing these diﬀerences is beyond the scope of this book.
The most important common feature of ﬁnancial assets is that they are claims and, at the same time, obligations on future cash ﬂows. (Here we refer to Chapter 2 where we recognised that ﬁnancial goods always appear in two balance sheets simultaneously: a future cash ﬂow can be a claim for somebody only if it is an obligation for somebody else.) Hence, when determining the value of a ﬁnancial asset, we have to calculate the present value of its future cash ﬂows. This is why present value calculation is so important in ﬁnance. We remark that these valuations might be very complicated, for two reasons. First, the nominal sums of the future cash ﬂows are not necessarily determined in advance (e.g., dividends of a stock). Second, the appropriate rate for discounting might be hard to ﬁnd. 
It is worth to observe that not only ﬁnancial assets can be the subject of investment. We can invest our money in oil, paintings, real estate, and so on. A derivative contract (see Chapter 5.5) on oil is a ﬁnancial asset, but one barrel of Brent oil is not. 
As for the basic features of the claim embodied, we can talk about debt and equity instruments. Bonds and loans are typical examples of debt instruments; their holders require ﬁx payments (i.e., payments not depending on the economic performance of the borrower) in return of lending funds. Equity instruments - common stocks, for example - promise payments dependent on the earnings of the issuer and paid after all debt instrument holders are paid. Because of this, equity instruments are also called residual claims.
Financial markets are markets where ﬁnancial assets are issued and traded. Diﬀerent aspects might group these markets. According to the products traded, we can talk about debt, equity, derivatives, etc. markets. As for the tenor of the investments, we distinguish between the money market and the capital market: the former is the market for short-term (i.e. shorter than 1 year) ﬁnancial assets, the latter is for long-term assets. The primary market is the expression for new issuances, while the secondary market is where already issued assets are traded over. Finally, it is important to mention that the "place" of the trading might be an exchange or the so-called over-the-counter (OTC) market. Several securities are traded in both; moreover, some stocks are listed in more exchanges at the same time.  
		 485.2. Bond markets Bonds are debt instruments similar to loans: the issuer is the debtor, the investor or the buyer of the bond is the lender.  The issuer promises to pay the interest and the nominal or face value of the security in the future. However, there are at least two signiﬁcant diﬀerences between loans and bonds. First, bonds are traded securities, which means that the 'lender' does not have to keep the asset until maturity, he can sell it on the secondary market. Second, the interest rate that the bond pays - also called coupon rate - is not necessarily equal to the return expected by the investors. Because of this, the loan amount that the issuer receives initially and that he pays back at maturity might be diﬀerent. 
The future cash ﬂows of a bond can be determined according to the following ﬁve parameters: face value, coupon rate, interest payment period, principal payment schedule, time to maturity. The face value (or nominal value) is the amount the issuer has to pay back to the lender in the form of principal payments. The coupon rate of the bond is always expressed as an annual percentage of the outstanding face value. If the interest payment period is shorter than one year, we calculate the time-proportional interest linearly. The interests might be paid annually, semi-annually, quarterly, and so forth. In the case of government bonds, annual and semi-annual interest payments are the most frequent. The simplest and most usual principal payment schedule is when the entire face value is paid in one sum, at maturity. In this case, we call the instrument bullet bond, while in the case of more, partial principal payments, we call it amortising bond.
Example: cash ﬂows of 4-year bonds with diﬀerent cash ﬂow schemes Consider four bonds: A, B, C and D. For all of them, the face value is 1,000 EUR, the coupon rate is 4% and the time to maturity is 4 years. A, B and C pay interest annually, D pays semi-annually. A and D are bullet bonds, B and C are amortising bonds. Bond B repays the face value in two parts at the last two cash ﬂow dates, in 20-80% proportion. Bond C pays equal principal payments during the 4 years.
TABLE 1: CASH FLOW SCHEMES OF 4-YEAR BONDS 
*Year = the period that has to pass for the CF to be paid, expressed in years It is worth to mention that the coupon rate of a bond can be ﬁxed or ﬂoater. In the ﬁrst case, the coupon is constant over time and determined at issuance – this was the case in the previous example. Floater bonds pay interest that varies according to a reference rate. This reference rate is usually an interbank rate like Libor or Euribor.  In the case of ﬂoater bonds, it is only the next cash ﬂow that we know in advance. 
Year*ABCYear*D140402900.520240402801203402402701.52041,0408322602202.5203203.52041,020
		 49Example: cash ﬂows of a 5-year ﬂoater bond A ﬂoater bond pays interest annually, the coupon is the 12-month USD Libor + 30 bps. At issuance, the Libor is 3.0%, so the ﬁrst interest payment of the bond is ﬁxed at 3.0%+0.3%=3.3%.  The second payment will be ﬁxed at the end of the ﬁrst year, and so on (see Table 2). At maturity, the last coupon payment and the face value is paid as well. You can observe that the payments follow the market movements, which means that ﬂoater bonds bear less interest rate risk than ﬁxed bonds. On the other hand, they carry cash ﬂow risk which is excluded in case of the ﬁxed securities. Hence, there is a trade-oﬀ between the two types of risk.  
TABLE 2: CASH FLOWS OF A 5-YEAR FLOATER BOND 
*CF=cash ﬂow that the bond pays at the end of the given year (expressed in percentage of the face value.) Finally, we have to mention some special types of bonds, those with embedded options. Convertible bonds give the right to the holder to exchange his bond to the stocks of the issuer company. These are instruments half-way between debt and equity. Callable bonds grant the right to the issuer to “call back”, that is to repay the bond’s face value before maturity. In the case of putable bonds, the holder has the right to “give back” the instrument to the issuer, that is to enforce the redemption before maturity. In all of these cases, the proper conditions of exercising the options must be determined in advance.  
5.3. Credit rating The most signiﬁcant issuers of bonds are central governments. Others are local governments, ﬁnancial institutions, and companies.  Corporate bonds are more common in the US than in Europe. 
Central governments issue bonds to ﬁnance their budget deﬁcit. In the US, the issuances are organised by the Department of the Treasury. The most important types of securities in this market are T-bills, T-notes, and T-bonds. (T stands for Treasury.) T-bills are money market instruments, with 12-month maturity at most. These securities do not pay any interest, so they have only one cash ﬂow: the face value at maturity. In case of positive discount rates, their price is under their face value and vice versa. T-notes and T-bonds are coupon-bearing instruments, with semi-annually interest payment period.  T-notes are medium-term assets, T-bonds are issued with at least 10 years of maturity. We may observe that in the case of the US Treasury securities, only the longest instruments are called bonds. However, the economic and ﬁnancial sense of bills and notes are the same, and they belong to the same broader class of ﬁnancial assets. It is quite general that the money market securities of the central governments are zero-coupon instruments, and that they have a distinct name.
Government bonds are often called risk-free instruments, since governments (countries) cannot go bankrupt. This is a very simplistic statement, for two reasons. First, we have to YearCF*Libor03.0%13.32.5%22.82.9%33.22.5%42.82.0%5102.3
		 50clarify that in this statement risk refers exclusively to credit risk, that is to the risk that the issuer is not able or not willing to pay its obligations. There are several other types of risk that a bondholder may take, the most important being the interest rate risk. Second, sovereign defaults occurred more frequently and in more countries than one might think - not only in South America, not only after military coups, not only in foreign currency, not only with very high debt/GDP ratio. However, we admit that government bonds issued in local currency are usually the safest investments within a country, concerning credit risk. 
TABLE 3: THE CREDIT RATING CATEGORIES OF FITCH 
Source: Fitch (2018)
Credit risk is a risk-type that is hard to measure. Specialised knowledge and expert is needed, and the data required for the calculations might not be available for every single investor. That is why credit rating agencies specialised to this task. The most well-known agencies are Moody’s Investors Service, Standard and Poor’s (S&P) and Fitch Ratings. They use alphabetical categories to assess the credit risk of a given issuer. The categories are similar, but not exactly the same at the diﬀerent agencies, see for example the grades of Fitch in Table 3. 
We may observe that the four best categories are called investment grades, while the riskier ones are speculative – they are also called junk bonds. It is important to mention that the agencies are not prophets. Their ratings rely on sophisticated models, but these are still only models subject to mistakes. 
CategoryShort descriptionInvestment gradesAAAHighest credit qualityAAVery high credit qualityAHigh credit qualityBBBGood credit qualitySpeculative gradesBBSpeculativeBHighly speculativeCCCSubstantial credit riskCCVery high levels of credit riskCNear defaultRDRestricted defaultDDefault
		 515.4 Stock exchanges The below description of stock exchanges is based on how the Xetra trading system works. Xetra is an all-electronic trading system, which was originally developed in the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, but has expanded to be used by various stock  exchanges  throughout Europe, including Hungary.   The trading system combines “continuous trading” periods with “auction” periods. In the Budapest Stock Exchange there are “auctions” from 8:30 to 9:00 a.m. and from 17:00-17:05 p.m. to collect the orders and after that in two minutes an algorithm knowing later determines the opening and the closing price of the shares. But there could be midday auctions as well, which enables liquidity to be concentrated in the middle of the day. To trade on the stock exchange the investor must open a securities account at a bank or at a brokerage ﬁrm. Both securities and cash can be placed on this account. The balance of the securities account is the value of the investor’s portfolio. Investors do not trade directly with each other but through an intermediary who can be a dealer or a broker. 
Dealers have their own securities accounts, from where they sell securities at the ask price, and buy securities at the bid price. Thus their proﬁt is the diﬀerence between the two prices, the so called bid-ask spread. The bid-ask spread reﬂects the liquidity of the security: the more liquid a security is the narrower is the bid-ask spread. 
Brokers do not have securities accounts, thus they do not trade on the stock market, instead they match the trade orders of investors. The most typical form of a trade order is the limit order, when the investor sets a price limit at which the given security can be bought or sold. 
A buy (or bid) order of price 80, size 120 can be interpreted as follows: the investor wants to buy 120 shares for 80 or cheaper. A sell (or ask) order of price 85, size 50 is an order, where the investor wants to sell 50 shares for at least 85 per share.
Limit orders that have not been executed yet are collected in the order book. The trading can be continuous, in this case matching orders are executed immediately, thus the order book contains orders that cannot be matched, i.e. the best ask price is somewhat higher than the best bid price. (“Best” from the point of view of the other side.) 
The order book below (Table 1A) contains the prices at which orders were given in a descending order. There is a one dollar diﬀerence between the best ask price (45) and the best bid price (44). These are the best prices because the cheapest price a share could be bought for is 45 at the moment, the highest price a share could be sold for is 44. 
TABLE 1A: ORDER BOOK. BID / ASKPRICESIZEASK47110ASK4645ASK4534BID4478BID4323BID4281		 52The order book can be rearranged to give a more transparent view of the demand and supply sides of the market (Table 1B).
TABLE 1B: THE ORDER BOOK REARRANGED. 
To avoid price manipulation only a limited number of the rows is public, i.e. displayed by the trading system. Every new order (except stop orders) placed in the central limit order book is immediately examined to see whether it can be executed against orders on the other side of the order book. Depending on the price limit of the incoming orders and the orders in the order book, execution can be performed at diﬀerent prices. Execution is performed in accordance with the time/price priority, i.e. the order with a higher buy limit and lower sell limit are executed ﬁrst. Following execution of the orders, all transactions are published immediately. For each transaction, the price, volume are displayed.
The trading system combines continuous trading (described above) periods with auction periods. 
The auction begins with the outcry phase, followed by price determination. In the meantime buy and sell orders are collected in the order book according to price/time priority without executing them. The price will be determined and the orders will be executed at a particular point in time. The outcry phase ends randomly to avoid price manipulation. At the end of auctions all executable orders are executed so, as to prevent a “crossed” order book, i.e. there are no purchase and sale orders that overlap in terms of price, enabling continuous trading to continue. All orders that were not executed remain in the order book. The auction price is determined in accordance with the principle of highest volume transacted. This means that the auction price is the price at which the highest executable order volume is evident.
Example 1: continuous trading Table 2 shows a part of the order book at a moment of the continuous trading period. The [86;1398] on the bid side means that there are orders to buy 86 stocks at price of 1398 or less. The [1405;110] on the ask side means that there are selling orders of 110 stock at a minimum price of 1405.
TABLE 2A: EXAMPLE 1 - ORDER BOOK BID (BUY) ORDERSASK (SELL) ORDERSSIZEPRICEPRICESIZE7844453423434645814247110
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize1201400140511086139814071402101395141032013413921411803401389141475		 53What are the impacts of the following orders on the book? What transactions can be executed if any can be done at all?
➡a limit selling order: price 1403, size 80
This is better for the buyers than the best sell oﬀer so far, but still is not good enough. It enters the top row of the ask side of the order book and the selling oﬀers so far slide down.
TABLE 2B: EXAMPLE 1 - CONTINUED 
➡a limit buying order: price 1403, size 100
At this time, a transaction is possible: since the top of the ask side is 1403, it can be matched with the new bid oﬀer. Thus 80 stocks will be sold immediately, and the remainder will be placed at the top of the bid side.
TABLE 2C: EXAMPLE 1 - CONTINUED 
➡a limit buying order: price 1406, size 90
The 90 stocks will be sold. The price will be the previous one (1405) which was already in the order book according to the price/time priority.
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize1201400140380861398140511021013951407140134139214103203401389141180141475
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize2014031405110120140014071408613981410320210139514118013413921414753401389
		 54TABLE 2D: EXAMPLE 1 - CONTINUED 
In case of market orders traders give the quantity to be bought or sold but they do not specify the price, which means that the order must be executed at the best price(s) available. A market order to sell (to buy) is executed buy going down on the bid (ask) size of the order book.
Example 1 - continued ➡market order to sell 70 stocks This order will be executed immediately at the best prices which are on the top of the bid side: 20 shares will be bought / sold for 1403, 50 share for 1400.
TABLE 2E: EXAMPLE 1 - CONTINUED 
Stop limit orders are conditional orders that can be executed after the market price have reached a predetermined value. In case of stop limit orders to buy, the trader sets an activation price (stop price) higher than the prevailing market price, because (s)he thinks that reaching the activation price gives the share an upward momentum. The investor’s reasoning is based on some market analysis that will be proved or disproved by reality later. The stop limit order to buy gives a chance to the investor to trade according to his/her believes about the future conditional movements of the price. 
Stop limit orders to sell are the reverse case: the investor sets an activation (stop) price lower than the prevailing market price, because (s)he does not want to sell until the market price is above this value. By this order (s)he can maximise the potential loss on the investment or can avoid a downward momentum triggered by reaching the stop price. (The existence of this sudden price drop is, of course undecided…)
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize201403140520120140014071408613981410320210139514118013413921414753401389
BIDASKSizePricePriceSize70140014052086139814071402101395141032013413921411803401389141475
		 55Example 1 - continued ➡stop limit order to buy:  stop price 1450, price 1480, size 100
➡stop limit order to sell: stop price 1398, price 1389, size 80
Neither of the above orders the order book until the market price reaches the given stop prices. 
Example 2: Price determination at auction After collecting the buy and sell orders the overlapping part of the order book looks like the below (Table 3A):
TABLE 3: THE ORDER BOOK AFTER THE AUCTION PERIOD. 
First, quantities are accumulated at each side, based on the fact that a limit order to buy (to sell) can be executed at a lower (higher) price. Thus, the accumulation is top-down at the ask side, and bottom-up at the bid side. Now, at each price the possible tradable amount can be determined by taking the minimum of the appropriate cumulated bid and ask oﬀers. The price at the end of the auction will be the one that maximises the traded quantity. 
In this example two prices (1385 and 1390) apply for this maximum principle. As the trading system has to come up with only one price, a secondary optimisation is introduced over the prices that maximise the traded quantity. The “winner” is the price where the oﬀered quantity that cannot be traded is minimal.
The prices where the highest transacted amount (160 stocks) can be executed are 1385 and 1390. The better one of them is 1385 because at this price there is only 70 stocks which could be transacted (there are orders to buy them at this price) but there are no selling orders to pair with them. At the price of 1390 there would be orders for 90 stocks which cannot be realised.
TABLE 3B: THE ALGORITHM DETERMINING THE AUCTION PRICE. 
The secondary optimisation could happen in other ways as well. For example, we could strive to achieve the higher price or the lower price movement. But the method of the Xetra trading system follows the method above so the auction price will be 1385. All cumulated asks below and at this price, and all cumulated asked over this price can be paired. From the 230 shares accumulated at the determined price 70 remains according to time priority. The order book after the execution of all orders (that could be paired) is shown by Table 3C and 3D.
BidPriceAsk401380120701385403013909010014008030140570
cum BidBidPriceAskcum AskTradable          min[cum Bid; cum Ask]Cannot be realised max[cum Bid; cum Ask] - - tradable27040138012012012023070138540160160701603013909025016090130100140080330130303014057040030
		 56TABLE 3C: THE ORDER BOOK AFTER THE AUCTION. 
TABLE 3D: THE ORDER BOOK AFTER THE AUCTION REARRANGED. 
5.5 Derivatives A derivative is a security whose value depends on the value of the underlying (asset). The underlying (asset) can be a share, a bond, some kind of commodity, foreign exchange, interest rate, a stock index, etc. Derivatives can be used for hedging and for speculation.
There are three groups of derivatives: 
•forwards,  •options, •swaps.  The forward contract is a mutual commitment of two parties to buy/sell the underlying at a speciﬁed price (FT) on some future date (T). The future contracts are special type of forward contracts traded on organised exchanges known as futures market. The value of the forward at maturity depends on the value of the underlying (ST). The buyer of the forward is in long position, that is (s)he gains proﬁt if  : (s)he pays for the underlying the forward price, and as (s)he can sell it immediately for the prevailing market price, the diﬀerence between the two prices is his/her proﬁt or loss. The seller is in short position, (s)he gets the forward price and pays the market price. (See Figure 1 for graphical details.) Thus the joint proﬁt of the two parties is always zero. This gives rise to pure cash settlement on the futures markets: the parties do not need to deliver the underlying asset physically, it is enough if the “looser” pays the appropriate amount (i.e. the absolute value of the diﬀerence between the futures price and the market price at maturity) to the “winner”.
In the case of having a LF(K=500) and a SF(K=800) position with the same maturity (T) the investor will have income of 300 at the maturity of the contracts. If the transaction costs of the contracts are lower than the present value of the 300, then the investor can get risk-free proﬁt which means that there are discrepancies in the market creating the possibility of an arbitrage.
Futures contracts and markets have further specialties. Considering that one of the goal of the ﬁnancial markets is to concentrate demand and supply, the future contracts are BidPriceAsk401380701385139090140080140570BidAskSizePricePriceSize701385139090401380140080140570
ST>FT
		 57standardised, which implicates higher trading volume and lower trading cost. On the futures markets counterparties do not make the deal with each other. The clearing house is an intermediary between buyers and sellers ensuring that the transaction happens as planned: the clearing house buys the underlying and pays the seller even if the buyer refuses to pay, and vice versa. The payable fee for this service is low because of the risk mitigation by the margin accounts. Each investor agreeing the contract has a margin account to receive the proﬁt and pay the loss on a daily basis. The proﬁt (or loss) comes from the one-day appreciation (or depreciation) of the future price. Because of this the clearing house is on the hook for only the risk of one-day price movement. Moreover, investors are required to have a deposit as well on that account which likely covers the one-day loss. If there is not enough fund on the account, the clearing house require the investor to deposit additional funds (margin call). Finally, only an extremely volatile market can result in the loss for the clearing house. See Table 4 for a detailed comparison of futures and forward markets.
TABLE 4: COMPARISON OF FUTURES AND FORWARD MARKETS. 
Options give their buyers the right – but not the obligation – to buy/sell the underlying asset at a speciﬁed price in the future, while the option seller is obliged to accept the buyer’s decision. 
The investor having the right is in long position, the other party having the obligation is in short position. In option markets, the procedure for shorting an option is commonly referred to as writing an option. The call option gives the right to its owner to buy the underlying; in the case of a put option the investor in long position (i.e. the buy of the option) has the right to sell the underlying. Therefore there are four possible positions depending on whether it is a call or put option and the investor is in long or short position
FuturesForwardtraded on organised exchangestraded on OTC (Over The Counter) marketsstandardizednon-standardizedlow counterparty riskhigh counterparty riskregulated marketless regulated marketdaily ﬁnancial settlementsettlement at maturityeasy to close positiondiﬃcult to close positioncheapexpensivehighly liquidrather illiquidmargin is requiredmargin is not required
		 58CALL option
•long call (LC): is the position of the option’s buyer having the right to buy the underlying asset •short call (SC): is the position of the option’s seller (writer) having the obligation to sell the underlying asset, if the other contractor wants to buy it PUT option
•long put (LP): is the position of the option’s buyer having the right to sell the underlying asset •short put (SP): is the position of the option’s seller (writer) having the obligation to buy the underlying asset, if the other contractor wants to sell it At the time or in the period when the option expires, the value of the underlying determines whether the right to buy or sell will be exercised. Figures 5A and 5B show the values of the four positions.
FIGURE 5A: THE CALL OPTION. 
FIGURE 5B: THE PUT OPTION. 
		 59Value of the position-500-400-300-200-1000100200300400500
Value (price) of the underlying at maturity01002003004005006007008009001000
Long Call
Short CallValue of the position-500-400-300-200-1000100200300400500
Value (price) of the underlying at maturity01002003004005006007008009001000
Long Put
Short Put		
Based on the above, the investor in the long position seemingly can only win with the option (otherwise (s)he would not exercise his/her right), while the investor in short position can loose or make a proﬁt of maximum zero. This is obviously known by both investors, therefore the counterparty in the short position will only enter into such contract if the other party pays for it (option fee).
There are many types of options, the most typical ones are the following. The American option can be exercised any time until its expiration date. The European option can be exercised only on the date of expiry. The Bermuda option can be exercised on the expiration date and on certain days before that. The value of an Asian option is based on the average price of the underlying asset, not on the prompt price of it at expiry. The barrier option can only be exercised if the price of the underlying asset is met or did not meet a predeﬁned value. These options are preferred by the buyers of the options because these are cheaper than normal options due to the lower probability of payment. The binary option is practically a bet where the option pays a certain amount only if the condition in the contract is met (e.g. if there is a hurricane it pays 1000 dollars; if there is no hurricane it does not pay anything). Exotic options are complex structured products, where the value of the option is derived by many complicated factors. (Sebestyén 2016)
The third type of derivatives are the swaps. They are about exchanging future cash ﬂows, out of which at least one is subject to uncertain factors (such as interest rate, exchange rate, stock price or the price of goods). These deals are personalized, OTC agreements. The two most common forms are interest rate and exchange rate swaps. In case of the former one party pays ﬁxed while the other pays ﬂoating interest rate on the same nominal value. To avoid excessive transaction costs and risks, the payments are netted, only the diﬀerence is paid. 
For example, the A ﬁrm pays 4% ﬁxed interest to the B bank, while it pays EURIBOR +3,8% interest to the A ﬁrm under a swap contract with a face value of 15 million euros. The payments are fulﬁlled annually. If the EURIBOR for the actual payment is -0,18%, then the bank must pay the ﬁrm 543.000 euro. Since this amount is higher than the ﬁxed interest (600.000 euro), after netting the payments the ﬁrm pays the bank 57.000 euro.
The reason behind an interest rate swap is usually that the buyer of the swap can have cheaper ﬁxed / ﬂoating rate loan, while businesswise it would be more beneﬁcial for it to have a ﬂoating / ﬁxed rate. With an interest rate swap however, it can achieve both goals. 
For example, if the movements of interest rates are indiﬀerent for the costs and incomes of a ﬁrm then the ﬁrm prefers to get ﬁxed interest loan otherwise the increase of the interest rate increases its costs as well diminishing the proﬁt while the incomes and the operating costs are the same. Getting a ﬁxed rate loan, the movements of the interest does not aﬀect its proﬁt. In this case the ﬁrm gets a ﬂoating interest rate loan (if it’s cheaper) of 50 million euros and looks for a bank who is willing to contract an interest rate swap for the face value of 50 million euro. By this position the ﬁrm pays the bank the ﬁx interest, and the bank pays the ﬂoating interest the ﬁrm, which is equal to the interest of the loan.
In case of an exchange rate swaps, the interest rate, the duration and the face value are ﬁxed, only the currencies are diﬀerent. Thus, the parties pay each other the interest in diﬀerent currencies in deﬁned timing. Netting is not evident in this case as the currencies are diﬀerent. The reason behind an exchange rate swap is usually that the buyer of the 		 60swap can have cheaper loan in one of the currencies, while business wise it would be more beneﬁcial for it in the other one. With an exchange rate swap however, it can achieve both goals.
For example, a Hungarian ﬁrm supposes its bond would be preferred by German investors, which means they tend to give loan at lowest interest rate, however the ﬁrm’s costs and incomes are in Forint. In this case it should issue euro bonds and contract an exchange rate swap to convert the euro cashﬂow to Forint, so that it can get the lowest debt interest and keep oﬀ currency risk. The bank as the counterparty of the swap pays the ﬁrm in euro the same amount as the ﬁrm has to pay the bond-owners, while the ﬁrm pays the bank the payment of the swap in forint (like the interest of the debt). Finally, not only the costs and incomes of the ﬁrm are in forint but the interest to be payed for the debt.
Bibliography Fitch (2018): Rating Deﬁnitions, Fitch Ratings. Available: https://www.ﬁtchratings.com/site/deﬁnitions
Xetra (2018): Trading. Available: http://www.xetra.com/xetra-en/trading
		 61CHAPTER 6 THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS In this chapter, we are getting prepared to understand international economics by studying the Balance of Payments (hereinafter “BoP”) which is both a certain framework for thinking and a practical statistical “tool” to analyse international economic relations. The BoP has been internationally developed to provide policy decision-makers with consistent and comparable information on economies’ external relations. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) ﬁrst created a manual for reporting balance of payments statistics in 1948. Since then, the IMF has been regularly updating the Balance of Payments Manual to respond to economic and ﬁnancial developments and the accumulation of experience by compilers (IMF , 200)). Nowadays, the notions of the BoP and the data reported accordingly are widely used in economic decision-making while also discussed and even challenged in the literature.        
This chapter is structured as follows. In Section 1, the purpose of the BoP is described while taking a ﬁrst glance at its overall structure. Section 2 introduces basic deﬁnitions and principles necessary to compile the BoP of an economy. This is indeed what the Reader is going to do in an example (Section 4), after having studied the content of the rows and columns step by step (Section 3). Finally, the chapter concludes with some remarks on the interpretation and application of the BoP in economic analysis.        
6.1 Purpose of the BoP      The BoP summarises all economic transactions between residents (i.e. the domestic economy) and non-residents (i.e. foreign economies) for a period of time. It does so in a structured way, with standard rules for the content and entry of data. Figure 1 shows the main structure of the BoP . Section 3 is going to describe each component in detail. Here, it is enough to note that the table is split into two main parts (horizontally): there is a real economic (I-II) and a ﬁnancial block (III-IV). 
This splitting is important because it reveals a more profound purpose of the BoP . By collecting all foreign transactions, it actually aims to determine the domestic economy’s net external position, arising from real economic links. As economies trade in goods and services and provide means of production (labour, capital) to each other (with incomes sent and received), deﬁcits and surpluses are likely to arise. This means either foreign borrowing (i.e. getting ﬁnanced by other economies, in case of a deﬁcit) or foreign lending (in case of a surplus) in net terms in a given period. Thanks to the ﬁnancial block, the BoP also shows the ﬁnancial transactions underlying the net foreign borrowing or lending. The net external position is further discussed in Section 3. At this point, the Reader should note that the BoP includes important information on an economy’s international ﬁnancing patterns.   
		 62FIGURE 1. THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS. 
6.2 Basic Deﬁnitions and Principles The BoP is compiled from the viewpoint of an economy regarded as domestic. That is, one can look at the BoP of the U.S. or China or Russia etc. Transactions are recorded vis-á-vis the rest of the world. It follows from the foregoing that notions with bilateral relevance, e.g. exports, imports, claims and liabilities refer to those of the domestic economy. 
Residents are the actors (households, ﬁrms, non-governmental organisations [NGOs] and the government) of the domestic economy. This is an exhaustive deﬁnition only at the ﬁrst glance, though, as the international mobility of people and entities raises questions about what the attribute “domestic” really means. For example, is a French citizen living in the USA an American resident? Is a foreign-owned company resident in the economy where it operates or where its owners reside? To solve this problem, there is a clear rule to classify actors as domestic, i.e. resident. An actor is resident if its economic interest is predominantly attached to the territory of the domestic economy. In more practical terms, this means that 
CreditDebitNetI. Current account (CA)   I.1. Goods   I.2. Services   I.3. Incomes   I.4. Current transfersII. Capital account (KA)   II.1. Non-produced, non-ﬁnancial assets   II.2. Capital transfersIII. Financial account (FA)   III.1. Direct investment   III.2. Portfolio investment   III.3. Other investmentIV. Change of reserves (dRES)V. Net errors and omissions (NEO)- - -- - -Balance0
		 63•people are regarded as residents of a certain economy if they stay there for at least one year; •ﬁrms and NGOs are regarded as residents of the economy where they operate, i.e. perform the core activities of their business.    FIGURE 2. THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS EXPLAINED. 
Here, it should be noted that the “economy” is to some extent diﬀerent from the geographical territory of the country in question. An “economy” also includes units geographically located in another country, but being under direct domestic control, such as embassies, consulates, military and scientiﬁc bases. By the same token, it excludes such units geographically located within the domestic country. The actors of such units are the residents of the controlling economy. 
The Reader should ﬁnd some examples helpful here. Let’s decide if the next actors are residents of the U.S.:
a)an American shopkeeper living in Mexico since 1991;
b)John Deere’s subsidiary in Russia;
c)Deutsche Bank subsidiary in the U.S. 
In case of a), the answer is no because this person has been staying outside the U.S. for more than one year. Regarding b), the answer is no again as this ﬁrm operates in CreditDebitNetI. Current account (CA)= CA   I.1. Goods   I.2. Services   I.3. Incomes   I.4. Current transfersII. Capital account (KA)= KA   II.1. Non-produced,            non-financial assets   II.2. Capital transfersIII. Financial account (FA)= FA   III.1. Direct investment   III.2. Portfolio investment   III.3. Other investmentIV. Change of reserves         (dRES)= dRESV. Net errors and omissions  (NEO)- - -- - -= NEOBalance≡ 0
		 64Expenditure, income or transfer  sent  by the domestic economy Revenue, income or transfer receivedby the domestic economy Real economic components of transactions (I-II)CA + KA = net external position
Financial components of transactions(III-IV)Russia. The case of c) is just the reverse, this ﬁrm operates in the U.S. and therefore, it is resident there. 
Transactions between residents and non-residents are recorded in the BoP on the basis of the following principles: 
•Transactions at market value: Transactions are accounted for at market prices even if partners agree otherwise.   •Accrual principle: Transactions are included if and when agreed on by partners, not when payed.  •Double-entry accounting of the transaction value: Each transaction involves a credit entry and a debit entry (see columns of the BoP in Figure 1). In most cases, this seems logical as transactions are usually exchanges, i.e. two-sided. There may be a real and a ﬁnancial “side” (e.g. selling a product in exchange for money), or there are purely ﬁnancial exchanges (e.g. taking out a bank loan, buying a share). However, in case of transfers, the double-entry accounting seems unjustiﬁed as transfers are unilateral transactions by deﬁnition (e.g. providing food aid does not result in any obligations on the part of the recipient). Nonetheless, this problem is solved by having extra rows for transfers. Thus, the double-entry principle is applied throughout the BoP without exception. This implies the ﬁnal  zero balance (further explained in the following section).            6.3 Constructing the BoP Step by Step This section explains the structure of the BoP along with the exact method of entering transactions data into it. Having discussed the double-entry accounting principle, the question naturally arises what “credit” and “debit” mean. In general, they can only be deﬁned rather broadly. The reason is that these terms are interpreted slightly diﬀerently in the diﬀerent parts of the BoP . So generally, it can be stated that values in credit increase the balances of the parts of the BoP while values in debit decrease them. This is so because net value of each row is calculated as credit – debit. By summing up all net values of a part, we get the corresponding aggregate balance (CA, FA, KA, dRes). (The same result is obtained by summing up all credits and debits of a part separately and subtracting the latter.) 
Still in general, credit could be loosely labelled as “revenue/inﬂow” and debit as “expenditure/outﬂow”. Figure 2 points out the accurate meanings which become clear once having studied the contents of the horizontal parts. 
As mentioned earlier, the BoP consists of two main horizontal blocks (separated by the dashed line in Figure 2). Into the ﬁrst block (I-II), the real economic components of transactions are entered. Throughout this block, values are accounted for in the credit column if the domestic economy obtains revenue or income in the transaction in question. Debit includes the reverse, i.e. expenditure or the outﬂow of income. This horizontal block is further split into the current account and the capital account. 
The current account (CA) shows ﬂows of goods and services (trade) and ﬂow of incomes and current transfers. Particularly, the following rows and contents appear here:
Goods: This row covers the international trade of products. Export of goods brings about revenues for the domestic economy, so it is entered as credit. Conversely, imports are accounted for as debits.  		 65Services: This row covers the international trade of services. Credits and debits in this row are interpreted in the same way as in “Goods”.  Incomes: In this row, the international ﬂow of incomes of means of production (labour, capital) is accounted for. These incomes are obtained either by workers or by holders of ﬁnancial or other non-produced assets who provide/rent these for foreign actors. Practically, this row contains salaries and wages, rents, interest incomes and dividends sent and received. If received by the domestic economy, these are entered into the credit column. Debit includes incomes sent abroad.  Compensation of workers appears in this row only if the employer and the employee are resident in diﬀerent countries. That is the case of workers who work in a foreign economy for less than one year as they are still residents of their economy of origin while getting compensation from a non-resident (a foreign employer). Staying at least one year abroad, these workers themselves become non-resident, though. Consequently, their compensation appears in the BoP only if they decide to send it home. If so, this amount is not regarded as an income any more, but as a (current) transfer because it is unilaterally provided to the home economy.   Current transfers: The purpose of this row is to account for a certain type of unilateral transactions. Transfers are considered as “current” if they directly aﬀect the level of disposable income (and hence, consumption possibilities). (By contrast, capital transfers included in the capital account aﬀect the level of wealth.) Typical examples of current transfers are aides, taxes on income and wealth and social contributions and social beneﬁts (e.g. pensions). Moreover, membership fees paid to international organisations are also entered as current transfers. If received by residents, transfers are regarded as credit. Conversely, transfers provided by residents to non-residents are debits.               The aggregate balance of these rows is known as the current account balance (also denoted by CA).   
The capital account (KA) includes the following:
Non-produced, non-ﬁnancial assets: The term “non-produced, non-ﬁnancial assets” refers to natural resources and rights to utilise them (e.g. land, mines/mining rights, radio spectra); permissions to undertake speciﬁc activities; and patents, copyrights, trademarks, brand names and franchising. The BoP includes transactions of these assets. Entries follow the same logic as in the ﬁrst two rows of the current account. If residents sell non-produced, non-ﬁnancial assets to non-residents, the transaction value is entered as credit (revenue to the domestic economy). If such assets are, on the contrary, bought by residents (expenditure), debits appear in the BoP . Capital transfers: Here, the description of “Current transfers” applies except that capital transfers aﬀect wealth.   The aggregate balance of these rows is known as the capital account balance (also denoted by KA).   
The sum of the balances of the current and capital accounts (CA + KA) deﬁnes the net external position of the domestic economy, i.e. whether it needs foreign ﬁnancing or is able to ﬁnance foreign economies as an outcome of its provision and use of real economic resources in a given period. To put it diﬀerently, the domestic economy may run an external deﬁcit (net borrowing) or an external surplus (net lending). As all values in the BoP , the net external position is a ﬂow indicator, capturing changes in a stock. An external deﬁcit (in itself) increases the liabilities of the domestic economy vis-á-vis the 		 66rest of the world (or decreases its claims). Conversely, an external surplus (in itself) results in an increase of its claims (or the decrease in its liabilities).    
The stock in question is most precisely the net international investment position (NIIP) which is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the foreign liabilities and claims of the domestic economy. At the start of a period, the domestic economy can have either net liabilities or net claims which is changed by the net external position recorded in the BoP for that period. It must be noted, however, that the change of the NIIP is not exclusively driven by the net external position. Revaluations, i.e. changes in prices of assets and exchange rates also aﬀect its value. Consequently, an economy running an external deﬁcit may indeed end up with (higher) net claims if its assets appreciate in the meantime. While revaluations can have particularly important eﬀects in the short run, Obstfeld (2012) nevertheless concludes that regarding long-term patterns, the NIIP is driven primarily by the net external position. (See 
The net external position is conceptually equal to the balance of the ﬁnancial account and the change of reserves (FA + dRES). In other words, the second block of the BoP (III-IV) shows how the net borrowing from or the net lending to non-residents is ﬁnanced as it reveals the various foreign ﬁnancial transactions in a given period. The ﬁnancial account (FA) records the following:
Direct investment: Also referred to as foreign direct investment (FDI), this type of cross-border investment arises when an investor acquires signiﬁcant degree of inﬂuence on the management of an enterprise resident in another economy. According to the IMF’s BoP standards, there is a signiﬁcant degree of inﬂuence if the investor obtains equity giving it voting power of at least 10 percent in the enterprise. If a non-resident invests in a resident ﬁrm, this is entered in the BoP as credit because the liabilities of the domestic economy increase. If residents invest abroad, that is precisely the reverse (increase of claims) and consequently, debit.  Owning equity in a ﬁrm gives rise to claims on that ﬁrm. (The best-known signs of that are dividends which, however, trace back to the very fact that the owner has invested part of its wealth into that company. This shareholding appears as an asset in the owner’s balance sheet.)  Portfolio investment: Portfolio investment involves trading ﬁnancial assets without acquiring signiﬁcant degree of inﬂuence on an enterprise (if this were possible at all). Trade of shares, bonds and other securities is accounted for in this row. Credits and debits are interpreted in the same way as in “Direct investment”. Investors involved in portfolio investment can be mostly regarded as ﬁnancial investors striving for exchange rate gains. By contrast, direct investors are more likely to be strategic investors having long-term interests in the speciﬁc business (industry). Other investment: Other investments include, among others, bank loans and trade credits. Credits and debits are interpreted analogously as in the previous two items, with residents taking out loans as credit (increase of liabilities) and granting loans as debit (increase of claims).  Taking a simple approach, reserves cover the currency stock of the domestic economy. More precisely, reserves refer to monetary gold and foreign currency (FX) assets held by monetary authorities (central banks) to meet balance of payments ﬁnancing needs (besides other purposes). Here, for simplicity, we assume that all international (FX) payments involve central banks (or less restrictively, that currency is deposited within the domestic two-tier banking system, “channelling” to the central bank). Hence, we can 		 67interpret reserves as “the domestic currency stock” used to pay for imports and including revenues on exports.   
The BoP records changes in this stock (dRES). If the domestic economy obtains currency (e.g. export revenue), the value is entered into the debit column. Currency outﬂow (e.g. payment for imports) is accounted for as credit. This is consistent with the interpretations of credit and debit in Figure 2 as a currency is a claim of the domestic economy. It is easy to see that residents with currency “in their pockets” can anytime decide to purchase goods, services etc. from abroad. More sophisticatedly, a currency is a domestic claim because at its very origin, it is a foreign bank’s liability. (Remember Chapter 2 on money creation.)
Having discussed the content of the BoP row by row, the section concludes with drawing attention to the ﬁnal 0 balance. As already mentioned,   as both columns contain exactly the same values. By calculating the balances of the parts (CA, KA, FA, dRES) ﬁrst and adding them up, only the order of addition and subtraction is changed. Hence, the following identity holds:
 
Note that in practice, the BoP is compiled by statistical authorities on the basis of a huge number of transactions reported by many economic agents. Therefore, the ﬁnal 0 balance is usually not obtained due to statistical errors and omissions. To achieve the conceptual zero, the value of the actual deviation is entered appropriately into the technical row “Net errors and omissions” (NEO).
In this example, let Hungary be the domestic economy. Transactions are then accounted for in Hungarian forints (HUF) (though overwhelmingly FX denominated in reality). After having recorded all transaction values, the Reader shall be able to determine the net external position of Hungary in this hypothetical example.
Transactions taking place over a period are the following:
(1)A Hungarian company buys goods worth 10 million HUF from a foreign company, and it pays in euros. 
(2)A Hungarian company sells services worth 6 million HUF to a foreign partner who promises to pay later.
(3)A domestic, American-owned company sends dividends in USD worth 20 million HUF into the U.S.
(4)A domestic foundation grants food aid worth 4 million HUF to an African country hit by drought.
(5)The state budget repays debt denominated in EUR (worth 100 million HUF) to a foreign bank (principal payment).
(6)The foreign buyer settles half of its debt arising from transaction 2).
(7)A domestic company decides to set up a subsidiary in Italy. Aiming to develop its production there, it makes the investment (50 million HUF) in kind: it hands over production lines and raw materials to the subsidiary. 
(8)A foreign media company successfully applies to broadcast on a domestic radio frequency. The media authority charges 200 million HUF for the use which the company promises to pay.  
(9)A domestic company buys industrial robots from its foreign parent. The robots are worth 50 million HUF , but the company pays only the equivalent of 30 million HUF for them.
∑credit−∑debit=0∑credit−∑debit=CA+KA+FA+dRES=0
		 68(10) A foreign investor buys shares worth 20 million HUF at the Budapest Stock Exchange, acquiring 1% of the shares of a domestic public limited company. (Payment in EUR.)
Solutions:  (1)This is import of goods, i.e. expenditure of Hungary, settled by immediate payment. 
Credit: Reserves, 10 million (outﬂow)
Debit: Goods, 10 million (import)
(2)This is export, so almost the reverse of (1), except that services are traded and payment is expected to occur at a later date.
Credit: Services, 6 million (export)
Debit: Other investment, 6 million (trade credit extended by Hungary
(3)Note that this company is resident in Hungary, so its transactions with its non-resident U.S. owners are rightly to be entered in the BoP . In this case, dividends are income of the U.S. owners earned by providing capital to Hungary.
Credit: Reserves, 20 million (outﬂow of currency)
Debit: Incomes, 20 million (income sent abroad)
(4)This is the “classic” case of current transfers, with food increasing the consumption possibilities of recipients. The use of the row “Current transfers” is evident from the above while the transaction itself materialises as an outﬂow of goods. In fact, export is registered which, however, does not result in any claims on the part of the aid provider. (Note that credit and debit cancel out each other, with no balance appearing in the CA.)
Credit: Goods, 4 million (export)
Debit: Current transfers, 4 million (transfer sent)
(5)This is a decrease of liabilities of Hungary, involving payment in EUR.
Credit: Reserves, 100 million (outﬂow of currency)
Debit: Other investment, 100 million (debt repayment)
(6)There remains 3 million EUR still outstanding as trade credit. The other half is obtained in cash. This item involves a change in the form of a domestic claim only. 
Credit: Other investment, 3 million (decrease of claims)
Debit: Reserves, 3 million (inﬂow of currency)
(7)Here, a direct investment is made by the domestic company as it sets up a fully owned enterprise abroad. The capital is granted in kind (ﬂow of goods).
Credit: Goods, 50 million (export)
Debit: Direct investment, 50 million (investment made abroad)
(8)The right to use a radio frequency is a non-produced, non-ﬁnancial asset. In this case, this right is bought by a non-resident, providing revenue to Hungary. The promise to pay later is regarded as a trade credit already seen in (2). 
Credit: Non-produced, non-ﬁnancial assets, 200 million (revenue)
Debit: Other investment, 200 million (claim on the foreign company)
(9)The industrial robots are imported from abroad. This is import as assets are sold and purchased by the parties. (So this is not an investment that would bring about the increase of the subscribed capital of the subsidiary, regarding the full ownership here). Still, there is an element which reﬂects the relationship between the two companies. Note that the industrial robots are worth 50 million EUR at market prices. However, the subsidiary is 		 69oﬀered a more favourable price, and no further liability arises in this transaction itself. That is, a transfer is provided aﬀecting the stock of assets in Hungary.
Credit: Capital transfer, 20 million (transfer received)
Credit: Reserves, 30 million (outﬂow of currency)
Debit: Goods, 50 million (import)
(10) As less than 10% of the shares is taken over, this is a portfolio investment. 
Credit: Portfolio investment, 20 million (investment in a Hungarian entity)
Debit: Reserves, 20 million (inﬂow of currency)
As a result of all the transactions, Hungary ends up with an external surplus of 196 million HUF in this period. This, ceteris paribus, means that its NIIP “improves”, with net liabilities decreased or net claims increased at the end of the period.
6.4 Concluding remarks In this chapter, the international balance of payments has been presented. The purpose of the BoP is to summarise all economic transactions between residents and non-residents for a period of time. A key notion of the BoP is the net external position which is the balance of the real economic transactions recorded. Although the net external position is an important marker of changes to external indebtedness, the net approach in itself is not suﬃcient to uncover all relevant ﬁnancing patterns. It is apparent from the BoP compiled in the example in Section 4 that gross ﬂows are much bigger than the net external position. This is of particular relevance in the case of the ﬁnancial block of the BoP . In a world of huge global capital ﬂows and complex ﬁnancial links, stability concerns may well arise from ﬁnancial transactions mostly appearing only in the ﬁnancial block.
Note that purely ﬁnancial transactions appear only in the ﬁnancial account and the row „change of reserves”, but not in their ﬁnal (net) balance as they cancel out when calculating it. Examples are transactions 5), 6) and 10) in Section 4.
Attention to gross values is also vindicated by the related fact that claims (resulting from surpluses) of some domestic actors are not directly available to settle the liabilities of others. So even if the domestic economy runs large external surpluses and hence, accumulates huge foreign claims in net terms, there are possibly actors who are (externally) indebted. If these debts happen to be unsustainable for whatever reason, a debt crisis may erupt due to spill-over eﬀects. 
However, the importance of the gross approach does not annul the relevance of the net external position in economic analysis. Sustained net patterns may signal underlying disturbances, “imbalances” in an economy or a group of economies. Recurrent external deﬁcits and countervailing surpluses may thus provide early warning of crises, e.g. international debt crises. Empirical evidence shows that external positions had become increasingly polarised in the case of the U.S. and China and within the euro area before the 2008 crisis.
In case of emerging economies, catching up usually involves external deﬁcits for several consecutive periods as advanced technologies can possibly be accessed only from abroad, or to put it diﬀerently, there is no suﬃcient internal capacity to invest. If external ﬁnancing is really used to achieve higher competitiveness (boosting export revenues to repay debts), there is no threat of unsustainability. It is hard, however, to come clear on this in advance. 
		 70While it is diﬃcult to tell ex ante if sustained external positions are truly problematic in a certain case, this chapter concludes with arguing that they are deﬁnitely worth of attention and further analysis.                
Bibliography IMF (2009): Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual. International Monetary Fund, Sixth Edition (BPM6), Accessible at https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/bop/2007/pdf/bpm6.pdf.
Obstfeld, M. (2012): Does the Current Account Still Matter? American Economic Review, Vol. 102(3), pp.: 1-23  
		 71CHAPTER 7 FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS 7.1 Introduction to FX-markets The price of one nation’s currency in terms of another is the so called FX-rate or exchange rate; the place where diﬀerent currencies are exchanged is the foreign exchange market. This is the largest ﬁnancial market: with a global trading of 7/24, the total amount of FX traded daily is about 5 trillion USD. The global trading of currencies is the fundamental of international economic relations, and therefore a key variable for the economic policy as well. 
This is a meeting point between many participants of the economy. Firms engaged to international trade are exposed to the movements of exchange rates. Importers of goods are having expenses in foreign currencies and revenues in the domestic currency; exporters are having revenues in foreign and expenses in the local currency. However, usually they do not change their exposure directly, but seek the adequate liquidity on the global market, usually via banks and other institutions. FX-risk management provides hedge against volatile exchange rate movements. Some participants take this risk on their balance sheets for proﬁt seeking reasons thus providing hedge to those who want to get relieved of their exposure. 
“Key currencies” are the currencies of the major economies. The US Dollar (USD) is called the ‘world currency’, the euro (EUR), the Swiss franc (CHF), the Japanese yen (JPY) are the most traded currencies besides the US dollar. Other currency pairs, such as Hungarian Forint  (HUF) / South African rand (ZAR) cannot be traded directly, but usually via key currencies. 
A foreign exchange quotation (or quote) is a statement of willingness to buy or sell at an announced rate. The CUR1/CUR2 quotation may seem a bit confusing or non-intuitive. The currency to the left of the slash is called the base currency or the unit currency. The currency to the right of the slash is called the price currency or quote currency. The quotation always indicates the number of units of the price currency, CUR2, required in exchange for receiving one unit of the base currency, CUR1. 
For example, the most commonly quoted currency exchange is that between the US dollar and the euro. The quotation EUR / USD 1.2174 designates the euro (EUR) as the base currency, the dollar (USD) as the price currency, and the exchange rate is USD 1.2174 = EUR 1.00. 
A direct quote is the price of a foreign currency in domestic currency units. An indirect quote is the price of the domestic currency in foreign currency units. In retail exchange in many countries (such as currency exchanged in hotels or airports), it is a common practice to quote the home currency as the price and the foreign currency as the unit. 
A woman walking down the Avenue des Champs-Elysées in Paris might see the following quote: EUR 0.8214 / USD 1.00 Since in France the home currency is the euro (the price) and the foreign currency is the dollar (the unit), in Paris this quotation is a direct quote on the dollar or a price quote on the dollar. Verbally, she might say to herself, “0.8214 euros per dollar,” or “it will cost me 0.8214 euros to get one dollar.” These are European terms. 
At the same time a man walking down Broadway in New York City may see the following quote in a bank window: USD 1.2174 /  EUR 1.00 Since in the US the home currency is the dollar (the price) and the foreign currency is the euro (the unit), in New York this would be a direct quote on the euro (the home currency price of one unit of foreign currency) and an indirect quote on the dollar (the foreign currency price of one unit of home currency). The man might say to himself, “I will pay $1.2174 dollars per euro.” These are the American terms. 
		 72The two quotes are obviously equivalent (at least to four decimal places), one being the reciprocal of the other: 1 EUR 0.8214/USD = USD1.2174/EUR Although a newspaper or magazine article will state an exchange rate as a single value, the market for buying and selling currencies, be retail or wholesale, uses two diﬀerent rates, one for buying and one for selling.  The bid is the price in one currency at which a dealer will buy another currency. The ask is the price at which a dealer will sell the other currency. Dealers bid (buy) at one price and ask (sell) at a slightly higher price, making their proﬁt from the spread between the prices. The bid-ask spread may be quite large for currencies that are traded infrequently, in small volumes, or both. Bid and ask quotations in the foreign exchange markets are superﬁcially complicated by the fact that the bid for one currency is also the oﬀer for the opposite currency. A trader seeking to buy dollars with euros is simultaneously oﬀering to sell euros for dollars. For simplicity we regard to FX-rates as mid rates (average of bid and ask) from now on. 
7.2 FX markets: demand and supply FX rates can be modelled in a simple supply-demand framework. To avoid ambiguity the market is observed from a domestic point of view. Demand and supply of foreign currencies can be connected to the international transactions of the home economy. Imports of goods and services and exports of capital generate FX demand, while exports of goods and services and imports of capital generate supply. 
If a Hungarian company buys foreign goods - for example Swedish furniture - it has to buy foreign exchange ﬁrst: import of goods   FX demand
If an investor who has HUF-denominated assets in Hungary - for example a bank deposit - wants to reallocate his portfolio by investing in American treasuries, has to buy US dollar ﬁrst: export of capital   FX demand
If a Hungarian manufacturer sells her product to a French merchandise retailer and is paid in euros, the she has to sell the euros for Forints, because she pays salaries, taxes, her domestic suppliers in Forint: export of goods   FX supply
If German investors want to buy shares on the Budapest Stock Exchange, they have to sell euros for forint: import of capital   FX supply
The market is in equilibrium when the quantity of foreign currency demanded equals the quantity supplied (Figure 1). If export of goods or import of capital increases, the supply curve shifts to the right, and the equilibrium exchange rate decreases (Figure 2, left hand panel). This is called the appreciation of the home currency (or the depreciation of the foreign currency). An increase of import of goods or of export of capital shifts the demand curve right, and the home currency depreciates (Figure 2, right hand panel). 
FIGURE 1: THE FX MARKET. →→→→
		 73quantity of foreign exchangeS(upply)D(emand)exchange rateFIGURE 2: APPRECIATION (LEFT) AND DEPRECIATION (RIGHT) OF THE HOME CURRENCY. 
7.3 Exchange-rate theories A practical point for understanding how exchange rates are determined is a simple idea called the law of one price. If two countries produce an identical good, and transportation costs and trade barriers are very low, or non-existing the price of the good should be the same throughout the world no matter which country produces it. One of the most prominent theories of how exchange rates are determined is the theory of purchasing power parity (PPP). It states that exchange rate between any two currencies will adjust to reﬂect changes in the price levels of the two countries. The theory of PPP is simply an application of the law of one price to national price levels.
Suppose that German steel costs 100 euro per ton and Japanese steel with the same quality costs 10,000 yen per ton. For the law of one price to hold, the exchange rate between the yen and the euro must be 100 yen per euro (€0.01 per yen), so that one ton of German steel sells for 10,000 yen in Japan (the price of Japanese steel) and one ton of Japanese steel sells for €100 in Germany. If the exchange rate were 200 yen to the euro, Japanese steel would sell for €50 per ton in Germany or half the price of German steel, and German steel would sell for 20,000 yen per ton in Japan, twice the price of Japanese steel. This situation generates excess demand for the Japanese steel, excess supply of the German steel and a demand for the yen (as German companies buy yen for euro). As a result, the price of Japanese steel increases, the price of German steel decreases, and the EUR/YPN exchange rate decreases (the yen appreciates) until the exchange rate equals the ratio of the two prices.
Applying the law of one price to the price levels in the two countries produces the theory of  purchasing power parity, which claims that if the Japanese price level rises 10% relative to the Eurozone price level, the euro will appreciate by 10%. As our example illustrates, the theory of PPP suggests that if a country’s price level rises relative to another’s, its currency should depreciate (the other currency should appreciate). Another way of thinking about purchasing power parity is through a concept called the real exchange rate, the rate at which domestic goods can be exchanged for foreign goods. In eﬀect, it is the price of domestic goods relative to the price of foreign goods denominated in the domestic currency. 
If a basket of goods in New York costs $50, while the cost of the same basket of goods in Tokyo costs $75 because it costs 7,500 yen while the exchange rate is at 100 yen per dollar, then the real exchange rate is 0.66 (= $50/$75). The real exchange rate is below 1.0, indicating that it is cheaper to buy the basket of goods in the United States than in Japan. 
The real exchange rate indicates whether a currency is relatively cheap or not. Another way of describing the theory of PPP is to say that it predicts that the real exchange rate is always equal 		 74qSDeS’
qSDeD’to 1.0, so that the purchasing power of the dollar is the same as that of other currencies such as the yen or the euro.
This prediction of the theory of PPP could work out in the long run. From 1973 to 2013, the British price level rose 102% relative to the U.S. price level, and as the theory of PPP predicts, the dollar appreciated against sterling, though by 60%, an amount smaller than the 102% increase predicted by PPP . Yet, as the same ﬁgure indicates, PPP theory often has little predictive power in the short run. From early 1985 to the end of 1987, for example, the British price level rose relative to that of the United States. Instead of appreciating, as PPP theory predicts, the U.S. dollar actually depreciated by 40% against the pound. So even though PPP theory provides some guidance to the long-run movement of exchange rates, it is not perfect and in the short run it is a particularly poor predictor. What explains PPP theory’s failure to predict well? The PPP conclusion that exchange rates are determined solely by changes in relative price levels rests on the assumption that all goods are identical in both countries and that transportation costs and trade barriers are very low. When this assumption is true, the law of one price states that the relative prices of all of these goods (that is, the relative price level between the two countries) will determine the exchange rate. The assumption that goods are identical may not be too unreasonable for German and Japanese steel, but is it a reasonable assumption for American and Japanese cars? Is a Toyota the equivalent of a Chevrolet? Because Toyotas and Chevys are obviously not identical, their prices do not have to be equal. Toyotas can be more expensive relative to Chevys and both Americans and Japanese will still purchase Toyotas. Because the law of one price does not hold for all goods, a rise in the price of Toyotas relative to Chevys will not necessarily mean that the yen must depreciate by the amount of the relative price increase of Toyotas over Chevys.
Furthermore, PPP theory does not take into account that many goods and services (whose prices are included in a measure of a country’s price level) are not traded across borders. Housing, land, and services such as restaurant meals, haircuts, and golf lessons are not traded goods. So even though the prices of these items might rise and lead to a higher price level relative to another country’s, the exchange rate would experience little direct eﬀect. As empirical studies ﬁnd PPP can hardly explain the change of exchange rate, so it is not suitable for forecasting or operative decision making. 
In the short-run exchange rates are determined by capital ﬂows. With free capital mobility investors (re)-optimise their portfolios according to changes in expected returns and risks. Suppose that there are two portfolios, the home portfolio (H) and the foreign portfolio (F) characterised by the   and   expected return - risk pairs respectively. Assuming that investors are risk-averse, a change in either of the four elements leads to a shift in portfolio weights. If the return of the home portfolio increases, investors reallocate their investments towards the home country, thereby appreciating the home currency. A decrease of the risk of the home portfolio leads to the same result. These are the cases of capital import from a domestic point of view. Capital export and thereby depreciation can be triggered by either a decrease of the   diﬀerence or by an increase of the   diﬀerence. 
7.4 Exchange-rate systems Normally, the trend of the exchange rate is determined by the fundamentals of the economy. The real appreciation of the home currency in the long rung is the mirror image of a higher potential growth rate of the home economy. However, capital movements triggered by the changes of investors return-risk perceptions can divert the exchange rate from its long-run trend. Though they are temporary, these diversions can cost economic agents a lot. 
(rH,σH)(rF,σF)(rH−rF)(σH−σF)
		 75Suppose that a Hungarian company imports raw material from Brazil, and sells its product in Germany. Both the import and the export are settled in euro. Suppose furthermore that the long-run equilibrium exchange rate is 320 EUR/HUF , and the company buys the euro to pay for the import at this rate. However, by the time it ﬁnishes manufacturing and sells the product, the Forint has appreciated by 5 percent, thus the rate at which the company can sell the euros received for the export is 304 EUR/HUF . If the competition is ﬁerce in the industry, this change can turn the company’s proﬁt into a loss. 
The higher the openness - measured by the total value of exports and imports relative to the GDP  - of an economy is, the more sensitive its performance is to exchange rate movements. Especially in small open economies the exchange rate is the most important element of the price system. Therefore economic policies have to deﬁne their relation to the exchange rate by determining an exchange rate regime.
The exchange rate regime is called ﬂoating when market demand and supply determines the FX rate without any central bank intervention. The central bank can inﬂuence the exchange rate both as a market participant and both as an authority. In the ﬁrst case it sell (buys) foreign currency if it wants to strengthen (weaken) the home currency. As an authority the central bank can restrict convertibility by imposing barriers to currency exchange. In formal terms a central bank intervention shifts either the demand or the supply curve to the right, restricting convertibility shifts these curves to the left. 
In a ﬁxed exchange rate system, exchange rates are either held constant or allowed to ﬂuctuate only within an explicit band. In general, the central bank must oﬀset any imbalance between demand and supply conditions for its currency in order to prevent its value from changing. 
In 2001 the Hungarian central bank introduced a ﬁxed exchange rate regime with a  band. The centrum of this band was 286 EUR/HUF the weak and the strong edges were 324 HUF/EUR and 240 HUF/EUR respectively. Market forces could freely determine the exchange between these two values. However whenever the exchange rate reached the weak (strong) edge the central bank had to sell (buy) euros to keep the exchange rate within the band. 
Central banks can strengthen the home currency to the extent of their foreign reserves. Buying FX is not technically constrained, because the central bank creates the home currency. However, as money creation can threaten the central bank’s inﬂation target (see Chapter 2), sooner or later intervention has to be suspended. 
When the central bank bank bumps into one of these constraints, it can either reset or exit the exchange rate regime. Reseting means that the parameters of the band are changed. In case of a weakening home currency and insuﬃcient FX reserves the central bank devalues the home currency by setting the centrum of the band higher. Devaluation is a legal act, an oﬃcial admission that the home currency was overvalued before. In case of appreciation and fear of inﬂation the central bank revalues the home currency by setting the centrum of the band lower. A third case of reseting the ﬁxed exchange rate regime is broadening the band.
In February 2008 a massive capital inﬂow appreciated the Hungarian Forint, and the exchange rate reached the 240 EUR/HUF limit. However, the Hungarian Central Bank did not intervene, instead it changed the exchange rate regime from a ﬁxed to a ﬂoating one.
±15%
		 76A ﬁxed exchange rate can be beneﬁcial to a country for several reasons. First, exporters and importers on the goods and services markets can engage in international trade without concern about exchange rate movements. Any ﬁrms that accept the foreign currency as payment would be insulated from the risk that the currency could depreciate over time. In addition, any ﬁrm that need to obtain that foreign currency in the future would be insulated from the risk of the currency appreciating over time. Firms can engage in direct foreign investment as well, as they hopefully can convert their foreign currency earnings into home currency without a major change in the exchange rate. Third, investors would be able to invest funds in foreign countries without concern that the value of their investments decreases because of an appreciation. 
A disadvantage of a ﬁxed exchange rate system is that there is still a risk of the central bank changing its currency’s value. Furthermore, from a macroeconomic point of view, a ﬁxed exchange rate system may render the country more vulnerable to economic conditions in other economies. Remember, PPP claims that the the home and foreign inﬂation rates are in a long-run equilibrium relationship with the exchange rate. If the exchange rate is ﬁxed, the inﬂation rate of the other economy is imported. Thus with a ﬁxed exchange rate a high foreign inﬂation can hurt the home economy. A ﬂoating exchange rate system can insulate the home economy from the inﬂation of other countries. 
If the United States experiences a high rate of inﬂation, then the resulting increased US demand for UK goods will place upward pressure on the value of the British pound. The appreciation will make UK goods more expensive for US consumers, even though UK producers have not raised their prices. The higher prices are caused by the pound’s appreciation; that is, a greater number of dollars are now required to buy the same number of pounds. In the United Kingdom, the actual price of the goods (as measured in British pounds) may be unchanged. Even though US prices have increased, UK consumers will continue to purchase US goods because they can exchange their pounds for more US dollars.
Another advantage of a ﬂoating exchange rate is that a country is more insulated from unemployment problems in other countries. 
Under a ﬂoating rate system, the decline in US purchases of UK goods will lead to reduced US demand for British pounds. Such a demand shift could cause the pound to depreciate against the dollar. This depreciation will make British goods cheaper for US consumers than before, oﬀsetting the reduced demand for these goods that may follow a reduction in US income. As was true with inﬂation, a sudden change in unemployment will have less eﬀect on a foreign country under a ﬂoating rate system than under a ﬁxed rate system. 
These examples illustrate that in a freely ﬂoating exchange rate system, the problems experienced in one country will not necessarily be contagious. Exchange rate adjustments serve as a form of protection against “exporting” economic problems to other countries. An additional advantage of a freely ﬂoating exchange rate system is that a central bank is not required to constantly maintain exchange rates within speciﬁed boundaries. It is therefore never required, just for the sake of controlling exchange rates, to implement an intervention policy that could have an unfavourable eﬀect on the economy. Furthermore, each government is free to implement policies irrespective of their eﬀect on the exchange rate. Finally, if exchange rates were not allowed to ﬂoat, then investors would invest funds in whatever country had the highest interest rate. The likely result would be governments of countries with low interest rates seeking to restrict the exit of investor funds from the country. Hence there would be more restrictions on capital ﬂows, and ﬁnancial market eﬃciency would be reduced. 
In the previous example, the United Kingdom is somewhat insulated from the problems experienced in the United States because of the freely ﬂoating exchange rate system. Although 		 77an advantage for the protected country (here, the United Kingdom), this insulation can be a disadvantage for the country that initially experienced the economic problems. 
If the United States experiences high inﬂation then the dollar may weaken, thereby insulating the United Kingdom from the inﬂation (as discussed previously). From the US perspective, however, a weaker US dollar causes import prices to be higher. This may increase the price of US materials and supplies, which in turn would increase US prices of ﬁnished goods. In addition, higher foreign prices (from the US perspective) can force US consumers to purchase domestic products. As US producers recognise that their foreign competition has been reduced by the weak dollar, they can more easily raise their prices without losing customers to foreign competition. 
In a similar manner, a freely ﬂoating exchange rate system can adversely aﬀect a country that has high unemployment. 
If the US unemployment rate is rising then US demand for imports will decrease, putting upward pressure on the dollar’s value. A stronger dollar will then cause US consumers to purchase foreign rather than US products because the foreign products now can be purchased cheaper. However, that reaction can be detrimental to the United States during periods of high unemployment. 
		 78CHAPTER 8  PUBLIC FINANCE AND TAXATION 8.1 The economic functions of the government The modern state has three economic functions according to Musgrave. These are:
•allocation, •redistribution, •stabilization. These functions represent the necessity of public sector in the economy. There is another so-called prefunction or zero function namely the creation of legal institutions. Examine the functions in order.
Allocation of resources According to the First Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics the perfect competition leads to Pareto-eﬃcient allocation of resources. In Pareto optimum no individual utility can be made better oﬀ cannot without worsening someone else’s utility. 
The Utility Possibilities Curve shows the maximal available utility of the second person (or social class) in function of the achieved utility of the ﬁrst person (or social class) at a given level of resources of the examined economy. (Figure 1) Point “D” signs an unavailable output, point “C” is a suboptimal, while point “A” and “B” are Pareto-optimal.
FIGURE 1: UTILITY POSSIBILITIES CURVE 
If the conditions of First Welfare Theorem are not met, the resource allocation will not be  Pareto-optimal (point “C”). The market failures are the following:
•public goods, •externalities, •asymmetric information, •monopoly. Public goods have two characteristics: their consumption is non-rivalrous and non-excludable. A good or service is non-rivalrous when someone’s consumption does not disturb others’ consumption. Individual utility from consumption will not be less if other individuals consume the same good. A good or service is non-excludable if it is possible to prevent consumption in case of non-payment. By the two characteristics four sets of groups can be constructed (Table 1).
		 79ADCBU(1)U(2)TABLE 1: THE SETS OF GOODS. Why does the market fail in the case of public goods while in the case of the private goods it works eﬃciently? If no one can be excluded from the consumption of a good and at the same time the consumption does not disturb others then nobody will be interested in producing this good. Free riding is a rational habit/attitude: just enjoying the produced good but not participating in the ﬁnancing/funding. If everyone thinks rationally no one will produce public goods, however, there is a massive demand for them. In the implementation of producing public  goods the government can play a role. If the market cannot achieve the Pareto-optimal resource allocation (market failure), then the government has to intervene and solve the problem. In this case the public sector can improve the eﬃciency – we call it Pareto-improvement. Adam Smith also supported the state’s intervention in the case of public goods, however, he devoted minimal role to  the public sector.
The second type of market failures is externality. When an economic actor does not calculate with every consequence of his activities we speak about external economic eﬀect. Imagine a company that works near by a river and pollutes it. 
Suppose, that the company does not care about the pollution while calculating the costs and returns. The marginal proﬁt function is decreasing in line with the quantity of production as Figure 2 shows. This marginal proﬁt becomes 0 when the production achieves the quantity Q’. Above this quantity the total proﬁt will decrease because the marginal proﬁt will be negative. At this point (Q’) the proﬁt is at its maximum so this represents the market equilibrium. Assume that there is a beach near by the river a few kilometres away from the factory. The pollution of the factory causes cleaning costs for this beach. This (external) costs are increasing in line with the quantity of production as Fig. 2 shows. The external costs and the marginal proﬁt functions cross at quantity Q*. This is a special point. The whole marginal proﬁt function for the society (hereafter the social marginal proﬁt) comes from the distinction of individual marginal proﬁt and the external cost functions (see Figure 3). At Q* the social marginal proﬁt is zero. This point will be the Pareto-optimal quantity. If the factory produces less than Q*, its marginal proﬁt would exceed the external cost of pollution so the company would be able to compensate the cleaning cost of the beach. If the factory compensates the beach indeed the company can increase its production until Q*. If the production exceeded Q*, the marginal proﬁt wouldn’t be able to compensate the external costs since it is less than the external cost. At point Q* nobody’s utility can improve without damaging anyone else’s utility.
ConsumptionExcludableNon-excludableRivalrousPrivate goods (apple)Common goods (air)Non-rivalrousClub goods (theatre)Public goods (lighthouses)
		 80FIGURE 2: EXTERNAL COST AND INDIVIDUAL MARGINAL PROFIT FUNCTIONS.
 
FIGURE 3: SOCIAL MARGINAL PROFIT FUNCTION 
 
According to the Coase Theorem if the government makes the rights clear, the proﬁt- and utility seeking behaviour of market participants lead to Pareto-eﬃcient resource allocation. From the aspect of eﬃciency the owner of the right does not matter. However from the aspect of equity the two cases are not identical since the owner of the right will get compensation. In this case the market solves the problem after the state has declared the rights. But usually there are a lot of victims of an externality far in time and in space. It is hard to deﬁne the compensation. In these cases the government uses taxes for collecting the external costs from the causers. Pigou suggested that the amount of tax should be equal to the amount of external costs. These taxes are called Pigouvian-taxes.
The government can decide if the company has the right to pollute or the beach has the right for clear water. In the ﬁrst case the company gets compensation from the beach for decreasing the production from Q’. While in the second case the beach gets compensation from the factory for increasing production from zero quantity. In both cases the equilibrium is at Q*. 
The First Welfare Theorem is true in the case of perfect competition. According to conditions of perfect competition the information is symmetric however, it is usually asymmetric. It can cause two types of problems: moral hazard and adverse selection. The Pareto-optimal resource allocation is not ensured automatically. The market can solve these problems (by using signals, ﬁlters or incentive mechanisms) in many times but not in every case. 
Without governmental intervention none of the banks would supply students loan anywhere in the world. The governmental intervention has several modes, for example the warranty.
		 81In the case of ordinary monopolist the pricing mechanism causes deadweight losses so the output is not Pareto-optimal. (In the case of price discriminating monopoly there is no deadweight loss but the problem of distributive justice is present - see the following chapter.) Usually the government prohibits the present of monopoly but in several cases it is impossible. When the average proﬁt is increasing with the production (economies of scale) the present of monopoly is natural. It is usual if the costs of entry are high while the running expenses are much less relative to it. Consider for example drainage. The investment cost is high while the cost of the joining of an additional consumer is close to zero. Instead of prohibiting these natural monopolies the government controls them.
Redistribution of income Redistribution of incomes is the second economic function of the state. At Figure 1 point “C” was not eﬃcient and point “D” was unavailable. What about point “A” and “B”? Both of them are eﬃcient but are they the same from other aspects? Point “A” signs a less symmetric distribution than point “B”. What if the society prefers “B” to “A” because the ﬁrst one is a more fair situation? According to the Second Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics any of the Pareto-eﬃcient resource allocations can be achieved by perfect competition in case of the adequate initial redistribution of resources. It means that the government only has to intervene at the beginning of the process and thereafter it leaves the economic actors to decide alone. In this case the result will be Pareto-eﬃcient and fair as well. This is the base of the mixed economy: the market and the government work together side by side. 
The main governmental instruments of the distribution function are (progressive) personal income taxation, social transfers and obligatory social security (health care and pension funds).
Macroeconomic stabilization Finally, the third economic function is stabilisation. Besides  eﬃciency and fairness there are four other important aspects which cannot be ignored by governments. The ﬁscal policy has to pay attention to the following four elements: price stability, employment, external balance and economic growth. 
8.2 Revenues of the Government The main instruments of the government to achieve its goals are taxation, transfers and expenditures. This chapter deals with the revenues.
Classes of taxes The receipts of the government have 3 main forms: taxes, charges and borrowing. In the case of borrowing the government has to repay it and to pay some interest as well. Before examining the tax categories it is useful to determine the basic deﬁnitions of taxation. 
Tax is a statutory monetary payment liability imposed unilaterally by the state without any reward. Statutory: determined in a law. Monetary payment: presently fulﬁllable only by money but in the past by product or services were usual. Unilaterally: the government decides without asking the citizens. Without any reward: the tax payer cannot claim anything against it.
Tax payer is a (legal or natural) person who is imposed by the tax law.
		 82Tax base is the quantity which is imposed by tax law. It can be a nominal value or a natural measure of the taxable subject. The former is typical in the case of income tax while the latter occurs in the case of property taxes (for example a ﬂat’s area in square metres or the engine capacity of a car). 
The design of personal taxes can reﬂect the economic characteristics (mainly the ability to pay) of the tax payer. The so-called In rem taxes depend on the transaction or object which they are imposed on, independent of the tax payer’s circumstances. They can be called direct and indirect taxes. These expressions are used to be approached from another aspect. In case of direct taxes the tax payer bears the burden of the tax while in the case of indirect taxes the tax payer can shift it. To make it clear the process of tax incidence has to be considered. 
Figure 4 shows the market of a good. The supply is signed by S before levying any tax. Let’s assume that the government decides to tax the selling of the good by an amount of t. After this decision the curve of supply will move forward by t S’, parallel with the original. The original market price (p0) increases, the new price is pt. After the seller gets this amount he has to pay the tax (t) and keeps the diﬀerence (pS) between the market price and the tax paid.
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (1)
The burden of the tax borne by the buyer is:   and by the seller is:  . They shared the burden between themselves. 
FIGURE 4: TAX INCIDENCE 
 
Tax rate can be expressed as a function which shows the amount of the tax payment at a given level of the tax base.
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (2)
Average tax rate function shows the ratio of the tax payment to the tax base. It is called eﬀective tax rate as well.
pS=pt−tpt−p0p0−pS
T=t(Y)		 83 .	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (3)
Marginal tax rate function calculates the tax burden of an additional unit of tax base.
 .	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (4)
The tax rate is called progressive, proportional (ﬂat rate) or regressive if its average tax rate function is increasing, constant or decreasing in order.
FIGURE 5: THE TAXTREE. 
Value Added Tax (VAT) is an indirect tax on transactions. Theoretically the tax base is the value added of the product or service between phases of production. In practice the a(Y)=TY=t(Y)Ym(Y)=δt(Y)δY
		 84
GDP
Gross Income
Employers social 
Gross Wage
Employees social contributi
Personal Income Tax
Net Labour Income
Corporate Tax
Corporate After 
Capital Gains Tax
Net Capital Income
Value Added Tax
Gross Labour Income
Gross Capital Incometaxpayer has to pay the rate of VAT based on the whole value but the previously paid VAT for the purchased products and services is deductible. The GDP (Gross Domestic Product) contains the VAT. If the rate of VAT is 20 %, the amount of it will be the 16.67 % of the GDP as the following equations give us. Equation (5) shows the decomposition of GDP . 
      (5)					
From (5) the VAT in the function of GDP if the VAT rate is 20%.
 
GDP can be divided according to the contribution of production factors, i.e. capital and labor. The gross labour income consists of the employer’s social contribution and of the gross wage of the employees. The former can be calculated similar to VAT. If the rate of social security contribution of the employer is 20%, the contribution will be 16.67% of the gross income from labour. The employee’s net wage is derived from the gross wage after deducting the personal income tax and the employee’s social contribution. The gross wage is the tax base of both.
The gross income from capital is the companies’ taxable proﬁt charged by the corporate tax. After paying the tax the company can reinvest and/or pay some dividend for the owners. They get the net capital income after deducting the capital gains tax.
Besides the taxes on the taxtree there are several other types of taxes in the world. Duties, excise taxes on tobacco, alcohol and fuel, property or wealth taxes, ecotaxes or green taxes etc. The most important revenue is realised from the excise tax on tobacco, alcohol and fuel because the demand of these products is reasonably inelastic. The economic weight of property or wealth taxes are varying in the world between 0 to 10 %.
Principles of taxation Many economists and social philosophers dealt with the requirements of a good tax structure. (They agree in many aspects but there are some diﬀerences obviously.) The most important principles are the following.
➡First of all the revenues have to cover the government’s expenditures. The tax system has to take into consideration equity, that is taxes should be fair. Two principles deal with this topic. 
➡The beneﬁt principle suggests that everyone should pay contribution proportional to the rate as (s)he enjoys public services. This concept does not calculate with the redistributional objectives. Usually those people require most public services (health care or education) who could not achieve private services. 
➡The principle of ability-to-pay deals with this question fundamentally. It says that everyone should be charged according to their capacity to pay taxes. Horizontal equity prevails if those with the same capacity are treated equally, whereas vertical equity claims that those with higher capacity must pay higher taxes.  The so-called equal sacriﬁce principles give 3 diﬀerent solutions for the tax determination problem. 
The Principle of equal absolute sacriﬁce requires that the absolute change in the utility has to be the same amount for every person in the society, that is
GDP = VAT + taxbase of VAT = 0,2x taxbase of VAT + taxbase of VAT = 1,2 x taxbase of VATVAT=0.2*GDP1,2=0.1667*GDP
		 85 	 	 	 	 	 	 (7)
The Principle of equal proportional sacriﬁce requires that the percentage change in the utility has to be the same ratio for every person in the society, that is
  for every i	 	 	 	 	 (8)
The Principle of equal marginal sacriﬁce requires that the marginal utility of the last tax unit has to be the same for every person in the society, that is
  for every i	 	 	 	 	 	 (9)
➡The requirement of eﬃciency claims minimal deadweight loss should be caused by the taxation. 
In Figure 4 the so-called Harberger-triangle shows the amount of it. Only some part of the decrease in consumer’s and producer’s surpluses was realised by the state as taxes. The remaining part is lost for the society, this is the excess burden of the taxation. The less is the price elasticity the less is the deadweight loss. From the aspect of eﬃciency any good with inelastic demand is an adequate tax base. However these goods have usually low income elasticity as well, thus taxing them charges mainly the poor. As there is a trade-oﬀ between eﬃciency and equity it is hard to decide between them.
➡The tax system is neutral if it does not disturb the ranking of the tax payers or the economic projects.  If person X has higher gross income or wealth than person Y , then their positions should not change with taxation. Similarly if the net present value of project A is higher than of project B their relation should not vary with taxation. 
➡The costs of administration should be as low as possible. These costs appear at the tax authority and at the taxpayers as well.
➡Elasticity of a tax system shows its ability to adapt to the varying circumstances. ➡Other features of the good tax system are simplicity, transparency, and stability. U(Yi)−U(Yi−Ti)=constan for every iU(Yi)−U(Yi−Ti)U(Yi)=constant for every idU(Yi−Ti)d(Yi−Ti)=constant for every i
		 86
 
 
 
 
 
LEONARDO DA VINCI  
Transfer of Innovation  
 
 
 
 
 
VALDON Ė DARŠKUVIENĖ  
 
Vytautas Magnus University  
 
 
 
 
 
Financial Markets  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leonardo da Vinci programme project  
 
 „Development and Approbation of Applied Courses  
Based on the Transfer of Teaching I nnovations  
in Finance and Management for Further Education  
 of Entrepreneurs and Specialists in Latvia, Lithuania and Bulgaria ”  
 
 
2010   2  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
Table of contents ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 2 
Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 5 
1. FINANCIAL MARKETS:  STRUCTURE AND ROLE IN THE FINANCIAL 
SYSTEM ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 6 
1.1. Financial system structure and functions ................................ ............................ 6 
1.2. Financial markets and their economic functions ................................ ................. 7 
1.3. Financial intermediaries and their functions ................................ ....................... 9 
1.4. Financial markets structure ................................ ................................ .............. 11 
1.4.1.  Financial instruments ................................ ................................ ............... 11 
1.4.2.  Classification of financial markets ................................ ........................... 13 
1.5. Financial market regulation ................................ ................................ ............. 14 
1.6. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 15 
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 15 
Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 16 
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ .................. 16 
2. INTEREST RATES DETERMINATION AND STRUCTURE ............................... 17 
2.1. Interest rate determination ................................ ................................ ............... 17 
2.1.1.  The rate of interest ................................ ................................ ................... 17 
2.1.2.  Interest rate theories: loanable funds theory ................................ ............. 19 
2.1.3.  Interest rate theories: liquidity preference theory ................................ ......20 
2.2. The structure of interest rates ................................ ................................ ........... 20 
2.3. Term structure of interest rates ................................ ................................ ......... 22 
2.4. Theories of term structure of interest rates ................................ ....................... 22 
2.4.1.  Expectations theory ................................ ................................ .................. 23 
2.4.2.  Liquidity premium theory ................................ ................................ ........ 25 
2.4.3.  Market segmentation theory ................................ ................................ .....26 
2.4.4.  The preferred habitat theory ................................ ................................ .....26 
2.5. Forward interest rates and yield curve ................................ .............................. 26 
2.6. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 29 
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 29 
Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 30 
Relevant websites ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 30 
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ .................. 30 
3. MONEY MARKETS ................................ ................................ .............................. 33 
3.1. Money market purpose and  structure ................................ ............................... 33 
3.1.1.  The role of money markets ................................ ................................ ....... 33 
3.1.2.  Money market segments ................................ ................................ .......... 34 
3.1.3.  Money market participants ................................ ................................ ....... 36 
3.2. Money market instruments ................................ ................................ .............. 37 
3.2.1.  Treasury bills and other governmen t securities ................................ ......... 37 
3.2.2.  The interbank market loans ................................ ................................ ......42 
3.2.3.  Commercial papers ................................ ................................ .................. 43 
3.2.4.  Certificates of deposit ................................ ................................ .............. 45 
3.2.5.  Repurchase agreements ................................ ................................ ............ 46 
3.2.6.  International money market securities ................................ ...................... 49 
3.3. Money market interest rates and yields ................................ ............................ 51 
3.4. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 54 
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 54  3 Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 54 
Relevant websites ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 55 
Review q uestions and problems ................................ ................................ .................. 55 
4. DEBT MARKETS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..57 
4.1. Debt market instrument characteristics ................................ ............................ 57 
4.2. Bond market ................................ ................................ ................................ ....59 
4.2.1.  Bond market characteristics ................................ ................................ .....59 
4.2.2.  Bond market yields ................................ ................................ .................. 60 
4.3. Bond valuation ................................ ................................ ................................ 61 
4.3.1.  Discounted models ................................ ................................ ................... 61 
4.3.2.  Bond duration and ri sk................................ ................................ ............. 63 
4.3.3.  Bond price volatility ................................ ................................ ................ 63 
4.3.4.  Behavior of Macaulay’s duration ................................ ............................. 65 
4.3.5.  Immunization ................................ ................................ ........................... 65 
4.3.6.  Bond convexity ................................ ................................ ........................ 65 
4.4. Bond analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ..67 
4.4.1.  Inverse floaters and floating rate notes ................................ ..................... 67 
4.4.2.  Callable bonds ................................ ................................ ......................... 67 
4.4.3.  Convertible bonds ................................ ................................ .................... 69 
4.5. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 70 
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 71 
Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 71 
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ .................. 71 
5. EQUITY MARKET ................................ ................................ ................................ 73 
5.1. Equity instruments ................................ ................................ ........................... 74 
5.1.1.  Common shares ................................ ................................ ....................... 74 
5.1.2.  Preferred shares ................................ ................................ ....................... 75 
5.1.3.  Private  equity ................................ ................................ ........................... 77 
5.1.4.  Global shares and American Depository Receipts (ADR) ......................... 78 
5.2. Primary equity market ................................ ................................ ..................... 80 
5.2.1.  Primary public market ................................ ................................ .............. 80 
5.3. Secondary equity market ................................ ................................ ................. 83 
5.3.1.  Organized exchang es................................ ................................ ............... 84 
5.3.2.  Over -the-counter (OTC) market ................................ ............................... 86 
5.3.3.  Electronic stock markets ................................ ................................ .......... 87 
5.4. Secondary equity market structure ................................ ................................ ...88 
5.4.1.  Cash vs forward markets ................................ ................................ .......... 89 
5.4.2.  Continuous markets and aucti on markets ................................ ................. 89 
5.4.3.  Order -driven markets and quote -driven markets ................................ ....... 89 
5.4.4.  Hybrid markets ................................ ................................ ........................ 91 
5.5. Equity market transactions ................................ ................................ ............... 91 
5.5.1.  Bid-ask spread ................................ ................................ ......................... 91 
5.5.2.  Placing order ................................ ................................ ............................ 93 
5.5.3.  Margin trading ................................ ................................ ......................... 95 
5.5.4.  Short selling ................................ ................................ ............................. 97 
5.5.5.  Stock trading regulat ions................................ ................................ .......... 98 
5.6. Equity market characteristics ................................ ................................ ......... 100 
5.6.1.  Stock indicators ................................ ................................ ..................... 100 
5.6.2.  Stock market indexes ................................ ................................ ............. 100 
5.6.3.  Stock market indicators ................................ ................................ .......... 103 
5.6.4.  Transaction execution costs ................................ ................................ ....104 
5.7. Stock market efficiency ................................ ................................ ................. 106  4 5.8. Stock valuation ................................ ................................ .............................. 109 
5.8.1.  Fundamenta l analysis ................................ ................................ ............. 109 
5.8.2.  Technical analysis ................................ ................................ .................. 110 
5.9. Processes of consolidation of stock exchanges ................................ ............... 114 
5.10.  Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ...115 
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 116 
Further readings ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 116 
Relevant websites ................................ ................................ ................................ ......117 
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ ................ 118 
6. DERIVATIVES MARKETS ................................ ................................ ................. 120 
6.1. Hedging against risk ................................ ................................ ...................... 120 
6.2. Description of derivatives markets ................................ ................................ .120 
6.3. Forwa rd and futures contracts ................................ ................................ ........ 122 
6.3.1.  Principles of forward and futures contracts ................................ ............. 122 
6.3.2.  Forward and futures valuation ................................ ................................ 124 
6.3.3.  Use of forwards and futures ................................ ................................ ...127 
6.3.4.  Futures contracts: stock index futures ................................ ..................... 129 
6.3.5.  Contracts for difference (CFD) ................................ .............................. 130 
6.4. Swaps ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 131 
6.5. Options ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 132 
6.5.1.  Options definition ................................ ................................ .................. 132 
6.5.2.  Components of the Option Price ................................ ............................ 135 
6.5.3.  Determinants of t he Option Price ................................ ........................... 136 
6.5.4.  Option pricing models ................................ ................................ ............ 138 
6.5.5.  Mixed strategies in options trading ................................ ......................... 139 
6.6. Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 139 
Key terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 140 
Review questions and problems ................................ ................................ ................ 140 
  5 INTRODUCTION  
 
Motivation for developing the course  
 
Research by the members of the project consortium Employers’ Confederation of Latvia 
and Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry indicated the need for further 
education courses  in the field of finance and managerial decision making . 
 
Innovative content of the course  
 
The course has been  developed to include the following innovative content:  
 Key concepts of financial markets , which are explained from an applied 
perspective , including with example s and problems from current financial markets 
practices from EU integration and development perspective;  
 Analytical techniques to be applied in financial markets provide  with 
understanding and tools to decision makers in the firm;  
 Applied exercises, which cover topics such as money market, debt market, equity 
market instruments, as well as decision making rules in the financial markets ; 
 Summaries are provided at the end of every chapter, which aid revision and control 
of knowledge acquisition during self -study; 
 
Innovative teaching methods of the course  
 
The course is developed to utilise the following innovative teaching methods:  
  Availability on the electronic platform with interactive learning and interactive 
evaluation methods;  
  Active use of case studie s and participant centred learning;  
  Availability in modular form;  
  Utilising two forms of learning - self-study and tutorial consultations;  
  Availability in several languages simultaneously.  
 
Target audience for the course  
 
The target audience are: entrep reneurs, finance and management specialists from Latvia, 
Lithuania and Bulgaria and, in the longer term, similar groups in any other European 
country.  
The course assumes little prior applied knowledge in the area of financial and operation 
analysis.  
The co urse is intended for 32 academic hours (2 credit points).  
 
Course o bjective  
 
The objective of the course is to provide entrepreneurs  with the knowledge in the area of 
financial markets , specific financial market instruments, behavior in order to enable the m 
to understand the financial markets processes and their factors, and to make successfully 
financial decisions on the individual as well as company level . 
  6 1. FINANCIAL  MARKETS :  STRUCTURE  AND  ROLE  IN THE  FINANCIAL  
SYSTEM  
 
Mini contents   The structure  of a f inancial system  
 Functions of  a financial system  
 The structure and key features of financial markets  
 The key features of financial intermediaries  
 Major financial market participants  
 
1.1. Financial system structure and functions  
The financial system  plays the key role in the economy by stimulating economic growth, 
influencing economic performance of the actors, affecting economic welfare. This is 
achieved by financial infrastructure, in which entities with funds allocate those funds to 
those who have potentiall y more productive ways to invest those funds. A financial system 
makes it possible a more efficient transfer of funds. As one party of the transaction may 
possess superior information than the other party, it can lead to the information asymmetry 
problem a nd inefficient allocation of financial resources. By overcoming the information 
asymmetry problem the financial system facilitates balance between those with funds to 
invest and those needing funds.  
According to the structural approach, the financial syst em of an economy consists of 
three main components:  
1) financial markets;  
2) financial intermediaries (institu tions);  
3) financial regulators.  
Each of the components plays a specific role in the economy.  
According to the  functional approach , financial  markets  facilitate the flow of funds in 
order to finance investments by corporations, governments and individuals. Financial 
institutions  are the key players in the financial markets as they perform the function of 
intermediation and thus determine the fl ow of funds. The financial regulators  perform the 
role of monitoring and regulating the participants in the financial system.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The structure of financial system  Firms  Stock market  
Bond market  
Short term fixed securities market  Banking sec tor 
Governments   7 Financial markets  studies , based on  capital market theory, focus on  the financial system, 
the structure of interest rates, and the pricing of financial assets.  
An asset  is any resource that is expected to provide future benefits, and thus possesses 
economic value. Assets are divided into two categories: ta ngible assets with physical 
properties and intangible assets. An intangible asset represents a legal claim to some future 
economic benefits. The value of an intangible asset bears no relation to the form, physical 
or otherwise, in which the claims are reco rded.  
Financial assets , often called  financial instruments , are intangible assets, which are 
expected to provide future benefits in  the form of a claim to future cash. Some financial 
instruments are called securities and generally include stocks and bonds .  
Any transaction related to financial instrument includes at least two parties:  
1) the party that has agreed to make future cash payments and is called the issuer ; 
2) the party that owns the financial instrument, and therefore the right to receive the 
payments  made by the issuer, is called the investor . 
Financial assets provide the following key economic functions .  
 they allow the transfer of funds from those entities, who have surplus funds 
to invest to those who need fun ds to invest in tangible assets;  
 they r edistribute the unavoidable risk related to cash generation among 
deficit and surplus economic units.  
The claims held by the final wealth holders generally differ from the liabilities issued by 
those entities who demand  those  funds . They role is performed by the specific entities 
operating in financial systems, called financial intermediaries . The latter ones  transform 
the final liabilities into different financial assets preferred by the public.  
 
1.2. Financial markets and their economic functions  
A financial market is a market where financial instruments are exchanged or traded. 
Financial markets provide the following three major economic functions : 
1) Price discovery  
2) Liquidity  
3) Reduction of transaction costs  
1) Price discovery  function  means that transactions bet ween buyers and sellers of 
financial instruments in a financial market determine the price of the traded asset. At the 
same time the required return from the investment of funds is determined by the 
participants in a financial market. The motivation for th ose seeking funds (deficit units) 
depends on the required return that investors demand. It is these functions of financial 
markets that signal how the funds available from those who want to lend or invest funds 
will be allocated among those needing funds a nd raise those funds by issuing financial 
instruments.  
2) Liquidity function provides an opportunity for investors to sell a financial instrument, 
since it is referred to as a measure of the ability to sell an asset at its fair market value at 
any time. Wi thout liquidity, an investor would be forced to hold a financial instrument 
until conditions arise to sell it or the issuer is contractually obligated to pay it off. Debt 
instrument is liquidated when it matures, and equity instrument is until the company is  8 either voluntarily or involuntarily liquidated. All financial markets provide some form of 
liquidity. However, different financial markets are characterized by the degree of liquidity.  
3) The function of reduction of transaction costs  is performed, when  financial market 
participants are charged and/or bear the costs of trading a financial instrument. In market 
economies the economic rationale for the existence of institutions and instruments is 
related to transaction costs, thus the surviving institution s and instruments are those that 
have the lowest transaction costs.  
The key attributes determining transaction costs are  
 asset specificity,  
 uncertainty , 
 frequency of occurrence.  
Asset specificity  is related to the way transaction is organized and execut ed. It is lower 
when an asset can be easily put to alternative use, can be deployed for different tasks 
without significant costs.  
Transactions are also related to uncertainty , which has (1) external sources (when events 
change beyond control of the contr acting parties), and (2) depends on opportunistic 
behavior of the contracting parties. If changes in external events are readily verifiable, then 
it is possible to make adaptations to original contracts, taking into account problems 
caused by external unce rtainty. In this case there is a possibility to control transaction 
costs.  However, when circumstances are not easily observable, opportunism creates 
incentives for contracting parties to review the initial contract and creates moral hazard 
problems.  The  higher the uncertainty, the more opportunistic behavior may be observed, 
and the higher transaction costs may be born.  
Frequency of occurrence  plays an important role in determining if a transaction should 
take place within the market or within the firm. A one -time transaction may reduce costs 
when it is executed in the market. Conversely, frequent transactions require detailed 
contracting and should take place within a firm in order to reduce the costs.  
When assets are specific, transactions are frequent , and there are significant uncertainties 
intra-firm transactions may be the least costly. And, vice versa, if assets are non -specific, 
transactions are infrequent, and there are no significant uncertainties least costly may be 
market transactions.  
The men tioned attributes of transactions and the underlying incentive problems are related 
to behavioural  assumptions about the transacting parties. The economists (Coase (1932, 
1960, 1988), Williamson (1975, 1985), Akerlof (1971) and others) have contributed to 
transactions costs economics by analyzing behaviour  of the human beings, assumed 
generally self -serving and rational in their conduct, and also behaving opportunistically. 
Opportunistic behaviour  was understood as involving actions with incomplete and 
distorted information that may intentionally mislead the other party. This type of behavior 
requires efforts of ex ante screening of transaction parties, and ex post safeguards as well 
as mutual restraint among the parties, which leads to specific transaction costs.   
Transaction costs  are classified into:  
1) costs of search and information,  
2) costs of contracting and monitoring,  
3) costs of incentive problems between buyers and sellers of financial assets.  
1) Costs of search and information  are defined in the follo wing way:   9  search  costs fall into categories of explicit costs and implicit costs.  
Explicit costs  include expenses that may be needed to advertise one’s intention to sell 
or purchase a financial instrument. Implicit costs  include the value of time spent in  
locating counterparty to the transaction. The presence of an organized financial market 
reduces search costs.  
 information  costs are associated with assessing a financial instrument’s investment 
attributes. In a price efficient market, prices reflect the a ggregate information 
collected by all market participants.  
2) Costs of contracting and monitoring  are related to the costs necessary to resolve 
information asymmetry problems, when the two parties entering into the transaction 
possess limited information o n each other and seek to ensure that the transaction 
obligations are fulfilled.  
3) Costs of incentive problems  between buyers and sellers arise, when there are conflicts 
of interest between the two parties, having different incentives for the transactions  
involving financial assets.  
The functions of a market are performed by its diverse participants. The participants in 
financial markets can be also classified into various groups, according to their motive for 
trading:  
 Public investors, who ultimately own  the securities and who are motivated by the 
returns from holding the securities. Public investors include private individuals and 
institutional investors, such as pension funds and mutual funds.  
 Brokers, who act as agents for public investors and who are motivated by the 
remuneration received (typically in the form of commission fees) for the services 
they provide. Brokers thus trade for others and not on their own account.  
 Dealers, who do trade on their own account but whose primary motive is to profit 
from trading rather than from holding securities. Typically, dealers obtain their 
return from the differences between the prices at which they buy and sell the 
security over short intervals of time.  
 Credit rating agencies (CRAs) that assess the credit risk o f borrowers.  
In reality three groups are not mutually exclusive. Some public investors may occasionally 
act on behalf of others; brokers may act as dealers and hold securities on their own, while 
dealers often hold securities in excess of the inventories n eeded to facilitate their trading 
activities. The role of these three groups differs according to the trading mechanism 
adopted by a financial market.  
 
1.3. Financial intermediaries and their functions  
Financial intermediary  is a special financial entity, which  performs the role of efficient 
allocation of funds, when there are conditions that make it difficult for lenders or investors 
of funds to deal directly with borrowers of funds in financial markets. Financial 
intermediaries include depository institutions,  insurance companies, regulated investm ent 
companies,  investment banks, pension funds.  
The role of financial intermediaries is to create more favourable transaction terms than 
could be realized by lenders/investors and borrowers dealing directly with each  other in 
the financial market.  
The financial intermediaries are engaged in:   10  obtaining funds from lenders or investors and  
 lending or investing the funds that they borrow to those who need funds.  
The funds that a financial intermediary acquires become, depending on the financial claim, 
either the liability of the financial intermediary or equity participants of the financial 
intermediary. The funds that a financial intermediary lends or invests become the asset of 
the financial intermediary.  
Financial in termediaries are engaged in transformation of financial assets, which are less 
desirable for a large part of the investing public into other financial assets —their own 
liabilities —which are more widely preferred by the public.  
Asset transformation  provide s at least one of three economic functions:  
 Maturity intermediation.  
 Risk reduction via diversification.  
 Cost reduction for contracting and information processing.  
 
Figure 2. Comparison of roles among fi nancial institutions  
Source: Madura J. (2008). Financial Institutions and Markets, Eight Edition  
These economic functions are performed by financial market participants while providing 
the special financial services (e.g. the first and second functions can be performed by 
brokers,  dealer s and market maker s. The third function is related to the service of 
underwriting of securities).  
Other services that can be provided by financial intermediaries include:  
 Facilitating the trading of financial assets for the  financial intermediary’s 
customers through brokering arrangements.  Surplus Units  
Policyholders  
Employers 
and 
Employees  Depository 
Institutions 
(Commercial Banks, 
Savings Institutions, 
Credit Unions)  
Finance Companies  
Mutual Funds  
Insurance 
Companies  
Pension funds  Deficit Units  
(Firms, 
Government, 
Agen cies, Some 
Individuals)  Deposits  
Purchase 
Securities  
Purchase 
Shares  
Premium
s 
Employee 
Contributions   11  Facilitating the trading of financial assets by using its own capital to take a position 
in a financial asset the financial intermediary’s customer want to transact in.  
 Assisting in the cr eation of financial assets for its customers and then either 
distributing those financial assets to other market participants.  
 Providing investment advice to customers.  
 Manage the financial assets of customers.  
 Providing a payment mechanism.  
 
1.4. Financial  markets structure  
1.4.1.  Financial instruments  
There is a great variety of financial instrument in the financial marketplace. The use of 
these instruments by major market participants depends upon their offered risk and return 
characteristics, as well as availabilit y in retail or wholesale markets. The general view on 
the financial instrument categories is provided in Table 1.  
Table 1. Financial instrument categories  
Category  Risk determinants  Expected returns  Main participants  
Non-
tradables  and 
non-
transferables  In wholesale money 
markets: transaction 
volumes  In wholesale 
money markets: 
low In wholesale money 
markets: banks  
 In retail markets: low 
transparency, lack of 
standardisation, low 
creditworthiness  In credit markets: 
low In retail m arkets: banks 
and non -bank firms 
and households  
 In foreign exchange 
markets: high volatility, 
change of currency  In foreign 
exchange 
markets: high  In foreign exchange 
markets: financial 
institutions, companies  
Securities  Market volatility, 
individual ri sks and 
failures  Comparably high  Banks and non -bank 
firms, individuals  
Derivatives  Market volatility, leverage  Very high  Banks and non -bank 
firms, individuals  
Source: Reszat B. (2008). European Financial Systems in the Global Economy  
A financial instrume nt can be classified by the type of claims that the investor has on the 
issuer. A financial instrument in which the issuer agrees to pay the investor interest plus 
repay the amount borrowed is a debt instrument . A debt instrument also referred to as an 
instrument of indebtedness , can be in the form of a note, bond, or loan. The interest 
payments that must be made by the issuer are fixed contractually. For example, in the case 
of a debt instrument that is required to make payments in Euros, the amount can be  a fixed 
Euro amount or it can vary depending upon some benchmark. The investor in a debt 
instrument can realize no more than the contractual amount. For this reason, debt 
instruments are often called fixed income instruments .  12 Fixed income instruments form a a wide and diversified fixed income market. The key 
characteristics of it is provided in Table 2. 
Table 2.Fixed -income market  
 Market  Features  Issuers  
Long 
term  Bonds  Long -term obligations to make a 
series of fixed payments  Governments, 
firms  
 Convertibles  Bonds that can be swapped for 
equity at pre -specified conditions  Firms  
 Asset -backed 
securities  Securitised “receivables” 
presenting future streams of 
payments  Financial 
institutions, firms  
 Preferred s tock, 
subordinated debt  Debt and equity hybrids  Firms  
Medium 
term  Notes  Medium -term obligations  Governments  
 Floating -rate notes  Medium -term instruments with 
interest rates based on LIBOR or 
another index  Firms  
Short 
term  Bills Short -term obligations  Governments  
 Commercial paper  Short -term debt instruments  Firms  
 Certificates of 
deposit  Short -term debt instruments  Banks  
Source: Reszat B. (2008). European Financial Systems in the Global Economy  
In contrast to a debt obligation, an equity instrument  specifies that the issuer pays the 
investor an amount based on earnings, if any, after the obligations that the issuer is 
required to make to investors of the firm’s debt instruments have been paid.  
Common stock  is an example of equity instruments. Some fin ancial instruments due to 
their characteristics can be viewed as a mix of debt and equity.  
Preferred stock  is a financial instrument, which has the attribute of a debt because 
typically the investor is only entitled to receive a fixed contractual amount. However, it is 
similar to an equity instrument because the payment is only made after payments to the 
investors in the firm’s debt instruments are satisfied.  
Another “combination” instrument is a convertible bond , which allows the investor to 
convert debt  into equity under certain circumstances.  Because preferred stockholders 
typically are entitled to a fixed contractual amount, preferred stock is referred to as a fixed 
income instrument .  
Hence, fixed income instruments include debt instruments and prefer red stock.  
 The features of debt an d equity instruments are contras ted in Table 3.  
The classification of debt and equity is especially important for two legal reasons.  First, in 
the case of a bankruptcy of the issuer, investor in debt instruments has a pr iority on the  13 claim on the issuer’s assets over equity investors. Second, the tax treatment of the 
payments by the issuer can differ depending on the type of financial instrument class.  
Table 3. Debt versus equity  
 Debt  Equity  
Characteristic  Borrower -lender relation, 
fixed maturities  Ownership, no time limit  
Advantages:    
 for the firm  Predictability, independence 
from shareholders’ influence  Flexibility, low cost of finance, 
reputation  
 for the investor  Low risk  High expected ret urn 
Disadvantages:    
 for the firm  Debt servicing obligation  Shareholder dependence, short -
sightedness, market volatility 
influencing management 
decisions  
 for the investor  Low returns  High risk  
Source: Reszat B. (2008). European Financial Systems in the  Global Economy  
 
1.4.2.  Classification of financial markets  
There different ways to classify financial markets. They are classified according to the 
financial instruments they are trading, features of services they provide, trading 
procedures, key market particip ants, as well as the origin of the markets.  
The generalized financial market classification is given in Table 4. 
Table 4. Financial market classification  
Criterion  Features  Examples  
Products  Tradability, trans ferability, 
ownership, maturity, 
denomination, substance  Equity, debt instruments, derivatives  
Services  Technical, advisory, 
information and knowledge -
based, administrative  IT support, research and analysis, 
custody  
Ways of 
trading  Physical, electronic, virtual  Over the counter, exchange, internet  
Participants  Professionals, non -
professionals, institutions, 
officials  Banks, central banks, non -bank financial 
companies, institutional investors, 
business firms, households  
Origin  Domestic, cross -border, 
regional, international  National markets, regionally integrated 
markets, Euromarkets, domestic/foreign 
currency markets, onshore/offshore 
markets  
Source: Reszat B. (2008). European Financial Systems in the Global Economy .  14 From the perspective of country  orig in, its financial market can be broken down into an 
internal market and an external market.  
The internal market , also called  the national market , consists  of two parts: the domestic 
market and the foreign market. The domestic market  is where issuers domic iled in the 
country issue securities and where those securities are subsequently traded.  
The foreign market  is where securities are sold and traded  outside the country of issuers .  
External market  is the market where securities with the following two dist inguishing 
features are trading: 1) at issuance they are offered simultaneously to investors in a number 
of countries; and 2) they are issued outside the jurisdiction of any single country. The 
external market is also referred to as the international  marke t, offshore market , and the 
Euromarket  (despite the fact that this market is not limited to Europe).  
Money market  is the sector of the financial market that includes financial instruments that 
have a maturity or redemption date that is one year or less at the time of issuance. These 
are mainly wholesale markets . 
The capital market  is the sector of the fi nancial mark et where long -term fi nancial 
instruments issued by corporations and governments trade. Here “long -term” refers to a 
financial instrument with an  original maturity greater than one year and perpetual 
securities (those with no maturity). There are two types of capital market securities: those 
that represent shares of ownership interest, also called equity , issued by corporations, and 
those that repr esent indebtedness,  or debt  issued b y corporations and by the state  and local 
governments.  
Financial markets can be classified in terms of cash market  and derivative markets .  
The cash market , also referred to as the spot market , is the market for the imme diate 
purchase and sale of a financial instrument.  
In contrast, some financial instruments are contracts that specify that the contract holder 
has either the obligation or the choice to buy or sell another something at or by some 
future date. The “somethi ng” that is the subject of the contract is called the underlying  
(asset) . The underlying  asset  is a stock, a bond, a financial index, an interest rate, a 
currency, or a commodity. Because the price of such contracts derive their value from the 
value of the  underlying  assets , these contracts are called derivative instruments  and the 
market where they are traded is called the derivatives market .  
When a financial instrument is first issued, it is sold in the primary market . A secondary 
market  is such in which  financial instruments are resold among investors. No new capital 
is raised by the issuer of the security. Trading takes place among investors.  
Secondary markets are also classified in terms of organized stock exchanges and over -the-
counter (OTC) markets.  
Stock exchanges  are central trading locations where financial instruments are traded. In 
contrast, an OTC market  is generally where unlisted financial instruments are traded.  
 
1.5. Financial market regulation  
In general, financial market regulation is aimed to ensure the fair treatment of participants. 
Many regulations have been enacted in response to fraudulent practices. One of the key 
aims of regulation is to ensure business disclosure of accurate information for investment 
decision making. When information i s disclosed only to limited set of investors, those 
have major advantages over other groups of investors. Thus regulatory framework has to 
provide the equal access to disclosures by companies.  The recent regulations were passed  15 in response to large bankrup tcies, overhauled corporate governance, in order to strengthen 
the role of auditors in overseeing accounting procedures.  The Sorbanes -Oxley Act of 2002 
in US was designed particularly to tighten companies’ governance after dotcom bust and 
Enron’s Bankruptc y. It had direct consequences internationally, first of all through global 
companies. The US Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd -Frank) of 
2010 aims at imposing tighter financial regulation for the financial markets and financial 
intermedi aries in US, in order to ensure consumer protection. This is in tune with major 
financial regulation system development in EU and other parts of the world.  
 
1.6. Summary  
The financial system of an economy consists of three components: (1) Financial markets; 
(2) financial intermediaries; and (3) financial regulators.  
The main function of the system is to channel funds between the two groups of end users 
of the system: from lenders (‘surplus units’) to borrowers (‘deficit units’). Besides, a 
financial system provi des payments facilities, a variety of services such as insurance, 
pensions and foreign exchange, together with facilities which allow people to adjust their 
existing wealth portfolios.  
Apart from direct borrowing and lending between end -users, borrowing an d lending 
through  intermediaries and organized markets  have important advantages. These  include 
transforming the maturity of short -term savings into longer -term loans, reduction of risk 
and controlling transaction costs.   
The field of financial markets and  its theoretical foundations is based on the study of the 
financial system, the structure of interest rates, and the pricing of risky assets.  
The major market players are households, governments, nonfinancial corporations, 
depository institutions, insuranc e companies, asset management firms, investment banks, 
nonprofit organizations, and foreign investors.  
Financial markets  are classified into  internal versus external markets, capital markets 
versus  money markets, cash versus derivative markets, primary ver sus secondary  markets, 
private placement versus public markets, exchange -traded versus over -the-counter 
markets.  
The financial markets and intermediaries are subject to financial regulators. The recent 
changes in the regulatory system  are happening in res ponse to the problems in the credit 
markets and financial crisis that struck 2008.  
 
Key terms  
 Financial system  
 Financial markets  
 Money markets  
 Capital markets  
 Debt markets  
 Derivative markets   16 Further readings  
1. European Commission (2007).  European Financial Integration Report 2007, EC, 
Brussels.  
2. Fabozzi F . J., Modigliani F ., (2007). Capital Markets: Institutions and 
Instruments . Prentice -Hall International . 
3. Financial Stability Forum (2008). Report on Enhancing Market and Institutional 
Resilience, FSF, Basel.  
4. Howells P., Bain K. (2008).  Financial Markets and Institutions . Financial 
Times, Prentice Hall.  
5. Madura J. (2008). Financial Markets and Institutions . Prentice -Hall 
International.  
6. Mishkin F. S., Eakins S.  G. (2006). Financial Markets and Institutions . 
Addi son-Wesley .  
7. Seifert , W.G., Schleitner , A.K., Mattern , F., Streit , C.C.,  Voth , H.J . (2000). 
European Ca pital Markets , Macmillan.  
8. Valdez, S. (2006) . Introduction to Global Financial Markets , Palgrave 
Macmillan . 
 
Review questions and problems  
 
1. What are the functions of a financial system?  
2. Distinguish the difference between deficit and surplus units.  
3. What is t he difference between ‘saving’ and a ‘financial surplus’?  
4. Discuss the advantages to deficit and surplus units of using organized financial 
markets and financial intermediaries.  
5. How are financial intermediaries able to engage in maturity transformation?  
6. Explain briefly the difference between deposit -taking and non -deposit -taking 
intermediaries.  
7. Why do people simultaneously hold financial assets and liabilities?  
8. Why is the average size of broker/ dealer operations in general smaller than that 
of asset transfo rmers?   17 2. INTEREST  RATES  DETERMINATION  AND  STRUCTURE   
 
Mini contents   Interest rate determination  
 Loanable funds theory  
 Liquidity preference theory  
 Level of interest rates  in the economy  
 Understanding of the term structure of interest rates  
 Theories of te rm structure of interest rates  
 Spot rates and forwards rates  
 Yield curves  
 
For financing and investing decision making in a dynamic financial environment of market 
participants, it is crucial to understand interest rates as one of the key aspects of the 
financial environment. Several economic theories explain determinants of the level of 
interest rates. Another group of theories explain the variety of interest rates and their term 
structure, i.e. relationship between interest rates and the maturity of debt  instruments.  
 
2.1. Interest rate determination  
2.1.1.  The rate of interest  
Interest rate is a rate of return paid by a borrower of funds to a lender of them, or a price 
paid by a borrower for a service, the right to make use of funds for a specified period. Thus 
it is one form of yield on financial instruments. Two questions are being raised by market 
participants:  
 What determines the average rate of interest in an economy?  
 Why do interest rates differ on different types and lengths of loans and debt 
instruments?  
Interest rates vary depending on borrowing or lending decision. There is interest rate at 
which banks are lending (the offer rate) and interest rate they are paying for deposits (the 
bid rate). The difference between them is called a spread . Such a spread als o exists 
between selling and buying rates in local and international money and capital markets. The 
spread between offer and bid rates provides a cover for administrative costs of the 
financial intermediaries and includes their profit. The spread is influe nced by the degree of 
competition among financial institutions. In the short -term international money markets 
the spread is lower if there is considerable competition. Conversely, the spread between 
banks borrowing and lending rates to their retail custome rs is larger in general due to 
considerably larger degree of loan default risk. Thus the lending rate (offer or ask rate) 
always includes a risk premium . 
Concept  
 Risk premium  is an addition to the interest rate demanded 
by a lender to take into account t he risk that the borrower 
might default on the loan entirely or may not repay on time 
(default risk).   18 There are several factors that determine the risk premium for a non - Government security, 
as compared with the Government security of the same maturity.  These are (1) the 
perceived creditworthiness of the issuer, (2) provisions of securities such as conversion 
provision, call provision, put provision, (3) interest taxes, and (4) expected liquidity of a 
security’s issue.  
In order to explain the determinant s of interest rates in general, the economic theory 
assumes there is some particular interest rate, as a representative of all interest rates in an 
economy. Such an interest rate usually depends upon the topic considered, and can 
represented by e.g. intere st rate on government short -term or long -term debt, or the base 
interest rate of the commercial banks, or a short -term money market rate (EURIBOR). In 
such a case it is assumed that the interest rate structure is stable and that all interest rates in 
the e conomy are likely to move in the same direction.  
Concept  
 Interest rate structure is the relationships between the 
various rates of interest in an economy on financial 
instruments of different lengths (terms) or of different 
degrees of risk.  
The rates o f interest quoted by financial institutions are nominal rates, and are used to 
calculate interest payments to borrowers and lenders. However, the loan repayments 
remain the same in money terms and make up a smaller and smaller proportion of the 
borrower’s income. The real cost of the interest payments declines over time. Therefore 
there is a real interest  rate, i.e. the rate of interest adjusted to take into account the rate of 
inflation. Since the real rate of return to the lender can be also falling over time, the lender 
determines interest rates to take into account the expected rate of inflation over the period 
of a loan. When there is uncertainty about the real rate of return to be received by the 
lender, he will be inclined to lend at fixed interest ra tes for short -term.  
The loan can be ‘rolled over’ at a newly set rate of interest to reflect changes in the 
expected rate of inflation. On the other hand, lenders can set a floating interest rate, which 
is adjusted to the inflation rate changes.  
Concept  
 Real interest rate is the difference between the nominal rate 
of interest and the expected rate of inflation. It is a measure 
of the anticipated opportunity cost of borrowing in terms of 
goods and services forgone.  
The dependence between the real and nomi nal interest rates is expressed using the 
following equation:  
i =(1+ r)(1+ ie) - 1  
where i is the nominal rate of interest, r is the real rate of interest and ie e is the expected 
rate of inflation.  
Example  
 Assume that a bank is providing a company wit h a loan of 
1000 thous. Euro for one year at a real rate of interest of  3 
per cent. At the end of the year it expects to receive back 
1030 thous. Euro of purchasing power at current prices. 
However, if the bank expects a 10 per cent rate of inflation 
over the next year, it will want 1133 thous. Euro back (10 per 
cent above 1030 thous. Euro). The interest rate required by 
the bank would be 13.3 per cent  
i =(1+ 0,03)(1 + 0,1) - 1 = (1,03)(1,1) - 1 = 1,133 - 1=0,133 
or 13,3 per cent   19 When simplified, the equ ation becomes: i = r + ie  
In the example, this would give 3 per cent plus 10 per cent = 13 per cent.  
The real rate of return is thus: r = i - ie  
When assumption is made that r is stable over time, the equation provides the Fisher 
effect. It suggest s that changes in short -term interest rates occur because of changes in the 
expected rate of inflation. If a further assumption is made that expectations about the rate 
of inflation of market participants are correct, then the key reason for changes in int erest 
rates is the changes in the current rate of inflation.  
Borrowers and lenders think mostly in terms of real interest rates. There are two economic 
theories explaining the level of real interest rates in an economy:  
 The loanable funds theory  
 Liquidit y preference theory  
 
2.1.2.  Interest rate theories: loanable funds theory  
In an economy, there is a supply loanable funds (i.e., credit) in the capital market by 
households, business, and governments. The higher the level of interest rates, the more 
such entities  are willing to supply loan funds; the lower the level of interest, the less they 
are willing to supply. These same entities demand loanable funds, demanding more when 
the level of interest rates is low and less when interest rates are higher.  
The extent to which people are willing to postpone consumption depends upon their time 
preference.  
Concept  
 Time preference describes the extent to which a person is 
willing to give up the satisfaction obtained from present 
consumption in return for increased consump tion in the 
future.  
The term ‘loanable funds’ simply refers to the sums of money offered for lending and 
demanded by consumers and investors during a given period. The interest rate in the 
model is determined by the interaction between potential borrowers  and potential savers.  
 
Concept  
 Loanable funds are funds borrowed and lent in an economy 
during a specified period of time – the flow of money from 
surplus to deficit units in the economy.  
The loanable funds theory was formulated by the Swedish economist  Knut Wicksell in 
the 1900s. According to him, the level of interest rates is determined by the supply and 
demand of loanable funds available in an economy’s credit market (i.e., the sector of the 
capital markets for long -term debt instruments). This theor y suggests that investment and 
savings in the economy determine the level of long -term interest rates. Short -term interest 
rates, however, are determined by an economy’s financial and monetary conditions.  
According to the loanable funds theory f or the eco nomy as a whole:  
Demand for loanable funds  =  net investment + net additions to liquid reserves  
Supply of loanable funds = net savings + increase in the money supply  
Given the importance of loanable funds and that the major suppliers of loanable funds are 
commercial banks, the key role of this financial intermediary in the determination of  20 interest rates is vivid. The central bank is implementing specific monetary policy, therefore 
it influences the supply of loanable funds from commercial banks and thereby  changes the 
level of interest rates. As central bank increases (decreases) the supply of credit available 
from commercial banks, it decreases (increases) the level of interest rates.  
 
2.1.3.  Interest rate theories: liquidity preference theory  
Saving and investme nt of market participants under economic uncertainty may be much 
more influenced by expectations and by exogenous shocks than by underlying real forces. 
A possible response of risk -averse savers is to vary the form in which they hold their 
financial wealth  depending on their expectations about asset prices. Since they are 
concerned about the risk of loss in the value of assets, they are likely to vary the average 
liquidity of their portfolios.  
 
Concept  
 A liquid asset  is the one that can be turned into mon ey 
quickly, cheaply and for a known monetary value.  
Liquidity preference theory  is another one aimed at explaining interest rates. J. M. 
Keynes has proposed (back in 1936) a simple model, which explains how interest rates are 
determined based on the prefe rences of households to hold money balances rather than 
spending or investing those funds.  
Money balances can be held in the form of currency or checking accounts, however it does 
earn a very low interest rate or no interest at all. A key element in the t heory is the 
motivation for individuals to hold money balance despite the loss of interest income. 
Money is the most liquid of all financial assets and, of course, can easily be utilized to 
consume or to invest. The quantity of money held by individuals de pends on their level of 
income and, consequently, for an economy the demand for money is directly related to an 
economy’s income. There is a trade -off between holding money balance for purposes of 
maintaining liquidity and investing or lending funds in les s liquid debt instruments in order 
to earn a competitive market interest rate. The difference in the interest rate that can be 
earned by investing in interest -bearing debt instruments and money balances represents an 
opportunity cost for maintaining liquid ity. The lower the opportunity cost, the greater the 
demand for money balances; the higher the opportunity cost, the lower the demand for 
money balance.  
Concept  Liquidity preference  is preference for holding financial 
wealth in the form of short -term, hig hly liquid assets rather 
than long -term illiquid assets, based principally on the fear 
that long -term assets will lose capital value over time.  
According to the liquidity preference theory, the level of interest rates is determined by the 
supply and deman d for money balances. The money supply is controlled by the policy 
tools available to the country’s Central Bank. Conversely, in the loan funds theory the 
level of interest rates is determined by supply and demand, however it is in the credit 
market.  
 
2.2. The structure of interest rates  
The variety of interest rates that exist in the economy and the structure of interest rates is 
subject to considerable change due to different factors. Such changes are important to the 
operation of monetary policy. Interest rat es vary because of differences in the time period,  21 the degree of risk, and the transactions costs associated with different financial 
instruments. Figure 3 provides an overview of the factors influencing interest rates and  
Figure 3. Framework for Forecasting Interest Rates  
Source: Madura J. (2008). Financial Institutions and Markets.  
thus the general framework for forecasting them.  
The greater the risk of default associated with an asset, the higher must be t he interest rate 
paid upon it as compensation for the risk. This explains why some borrowers pay higher 
rates of interest than others.  Future State of 
Foreign Economies 
and Expectations of 
Exchange Rate 
Movements  
Future Level of 
Household Income  
Household Plans to 
Borrow  
Future Plans for 
Expansion  
Future Volume of 
Business  
Future Volume of 
Government 
Revenues  
Future Government 
Expenditures  
Future Level of 
Household income  
Fed’s Future 
Policies on Money 
Supply Growth  
Future State of 
Foreign Economies 
and Expectati ons of 
Exchange Rate 
Movements  Future Foreign 
Demand for  
 Funds  
Future 
Household 
Demand for 
Funds  
Future Business 
Demand for 
Funds  
Future 
Government 
Demand for 
Funds  
Future Savings 
by Households 
and Others  
Future Foreig n 
Supply of 
Loanable Funds   Future 
Demand 
for 
Loanable 
Funds  
Future 
Demand 
for 
Loanable 
Funds  Forecast 
of Interest 
Rates  Future State of 
the Economy 
(Economic 
Growth, 
Unemployment, 
Inflation)   22 The degree of risk associated with a request for a loan may be determined based upona 
company’s size, profitability or p ast performance; or, it may be determined more formally 
by credit rating agencies. Borrowers with high credit ratings will be able to have 
commercial bills accepted by banks, find willing takers for their commercial paper or 
borrow directly from banks at l ower rates of interest. Such borrowers are often referred to 
as prime borrowers. Those less favored may have to borrow from other sources at higher 
rates.  
The same principle applies to the comparison between interest rates on sound risk -free 
loans (such a s government bonds) and expected yields on equities. The more risky a 
company is thought to be, the lower will be its share price in relation to its expected 
average dividend payment – that is, the higher will be its dividend yield and the more 
expensive i t will be for the company to raise equity capital.  
 
2.3. Term structure of interest rates  
The relationship between the yields on comparable securities but different maturities is 
called the term structure of interest rates . The primary focus here is the Treasu ry 
market. The graphic that depicts the relationship between the yield on Treasury securities 
with different maturities is known as the yield curve  and, therefore, the maturity spread is 
also referred to as the yield curve spread .  
Concept  
 Yield curve: Shows the relationships between the interest 
rates payable on bonds with different lengths of time to 
maturity. That is, it shows the term structure of interest rates.  
The focus on the Treasury yield curve functions is due mainly because of its role as a 
benchmark for setting yields in many other sectors of the debt market. However, a 
Treasury yield curve based on observed yields on the Treasury market is an unsatisfactory 
measure of the relation between required yield and maturity. The key reason is that 
securities with the same maturity may actually provide different yields.  
Hence, it is necessary to develop more accurate and reliable estimates of the Treasury 
yield curve. It is important to estimate the theoretical interest rate that the Treasury would 
have to pay assuming that the security it issued is a zero -coupon security.  
If the term structure is plotted a t a given point in time, based on the yield to maturity, or 
the spot rate, at successive maturities against maturity, one of the three shapes of th e yield 
curve would be observed. The type of yield curve, when the yield increases with maturity, 
is referred to as an upward -sloping yield  curve or a positively sloped yield curve . A 
distinction is made for upward sloping yield curves based on the steepne ss of the yield 
curve. The steepness of the yield curve is typically measured in terms of the maturity 
spread between the long -term and short -term yields.  
A downward -sloping or inverted yield curve is the one , where yields in general decline 
as maturity i ncreases.  
A variant of the flat yield  is the one in which the yield on short -term and long -term 
Treasuries are similar but the yield on intermediate -term Treasuries are much lower than, 
for example, the six -month and 30 -year yields. Such a yield curve is referred to as a 
humped yield curve .  
 
2.4. Theories of term structure of interest rates  
There are several major economic theories that explain the observed shapes of the yield 
curve:   23  Expectations theory  
 Liquidity premium theory  
 Market segmentation theory  
 Preferred habitat theory  
 
2.4.1.  Expectations theory  
The pure expectations theory assumes that investors are indifferent between investing for a 
long period on the one hand and investing for a shorter period with a view to reinvesting 
the principal plus interest on t he other hand. For example an investor would have no 
preference between making a 12 -month deposit and making a 6 -month deposit with a view 
to reinvesting the proceeds for a further six months so long as the expected interest 
receipts are the same. This is equivalent to saying that the pure expectations theory 
assumes that investors treat alternative maturities as perfect substitutes for one another.  
The pure expectations theory assumes that investors are risk -neutral. A risk -neutral 
investor is not concerne d about the possibility that interest rate expectations will prove to 
be incorrect, so long as potential favourable deviations from expectations are as likely as 
unfavourable ones. Risk is not regarded negatively.  
However, most investors are risk -averse, i .e. they are prepared to forgo some investment 
return in order to achieve greater certainty about return and value of their investments. As 
a result of risk -aversion, investors may not be indifferent between alternative maturities. 
Attitudes to risk may ge nerate preferences for either short or long maturities. If such is the 
case, the term structure of interest rates (the yield curve) would reflect risk premiums.  
Question    
 How a yield curve would shift in response to sudden 
expectations of rising interest  rates according to pure 
expectations theory?  
If an investment is close to maturity, there is little risk of capital loss arising from interest 
rate changes. A bond with a distant maturity (long duration) would suffer considerable 
capital loss in the even t of a large rise in interest rates. The risk of such losses is known as 
capital risk . 
To compensate for the risk that capital loss might be realised on long -term investments, 
investors may require a risk premium on such investments. A risk premium is an a ddition 
to the interest or yield to compensate investors for accepting risk. This results in an upward 
slope to a yield curve. This tendency towards an upward slope is likely to be reinforced by 
the preference of many borrowers to borrow for long periods ( rather than borrowing for a 
succession of short periods).  
Some investors may prefer long maturity investments because they provide greater 
certainty of income flows. This uncertainty is income risk . If investors have a preference 
for predictability of int erest receipts, they may require a higher rate of interest on short -
term investments to compensate for income risk. This would tend to cause the yield curve 
to be inverted (downward sloping).  
The effects on the slope of the yield curve from factors such as  capital risk and income risk 
are in addition to the effect of expectations of future short -term interest rates. If money 
market participants expect short -term interest rates to rise, the yield curve would tend to be 
upward sloping. If the effect of capita l risk were greater than the effect of income risk, the 
upward slope would be steeper. If market expectations were that short -term interest rates 
would fall in the future, the yield curve would tend to be downward sloping. A dominance  24 of capital -risk avers ion over income -risk aversion would render the downward slope less 
steep (or possibly turn a downward slope into an upward slope).  
Figure 4. How Interest Rate Expectations Affect the Yield Curve  
Source: Madura J. (2008). Financia l Institutions and Markets  Yield  
YC1 
3 Months  10 Years  
E(↑i) → Supply of funds provided by investors ↑ in short -term (such as 3 -month) markets, and ↓ in long -
term (such as 10 -year) markets. Demand for funds by borrowers ↑ in long -term markets and ↓ in short -
term ma rkets. Therefore, the yield curve becomes upward sloping as shown here.  Panel A: Impact of a Sudden Expectation of Higher Interest Rates  
 
Market for 3 -Month 
(Short term)  
Risk -free Debt  Market for 3 -Month 
(Short term)  
Risk -free Debt  Market for 3 -Month 
(Short term)  
Risk -free Debt  
i 
i1 
i2 S1 
   S 2 
  D 1 
D2 
Quantity 
of Funds  i2 
i1 i S2 
  S1 
  D 2 
  D 1 
Quantity 
of Funds  YC2 
Term to 
Maturity  
Panel B: Impact of a Sudden Expectation of Lower Interest Rates  
 
i2 
i1 i S2 
  S1 
  D 2 
  D 1 
Quantity 
of Funds  i 
i1 
i2 S1 
   S 2 
  D 1 
D2 
Quantity 
of Funds  Yield  
YC1 
3 Months  10 Years  
E(↓i) → Supply of funds provided by investors ↑ in long -term (such as 10 -year) markets, and ↓ in short -
term (such as 3 -month) markets. Demand for funds by borrowers ↑ in short -term markets and ↓ in long -
term markets. Therefore, the yield curve becomes down ward sloping as shown here.  YC2 
Term to 
Maturity   25 The Figure  4 provides a graphical explanation, how interest rate expectations affect the 
yield curve . 
Question   
 Why interest rates tend to decrease during recessionary 
periods?  
 
Question  What is the relationship between yield and liquidity of the 
securities?  
 
2.4.2.  Liquidity premium theory  
Some investors may prefer to own shorter rather than longer term securities because a 
shorter maturity represents greater liquidity. In such case they will be  willing to hold long 
term securities only if compensated with a premium for the lower degree of liquidity. 
Though long -term securities may be liquidated prior to maturity, their prices are more 
sensitive to interest rate movements. Short -term securities a re usually considered to be 
more liquid because they are more likely to be converted to cash without a loss in value. 
Thus there is a liquidity premium for less liquid securities which changes over time. The 
impact of liquidity premium on interest rates is  explained by liquidity premium theory.  
 
 
Figure 5. Impact of liquidity premium on the yield curve under three scenarios  
Source: Madura J. (2008). Financial Institutions and Markets.  
 
Figure 5 provides a grap hical explanation of impact of liquidity premium on interest rates 
and yield curve.  Scenar io 1: 
Market expects stable 
interest rates  Scenario 3:  
Market expects a 
reduction in interest Annualized Yield  
Annualized Yield  Inclusion of 
Liquidity 
Premium  
Liquidity 
Premium 
Removed  
Term to 
Maturity  Scenario 2:  
Market expects an 
increase in interest rates  Annualized Yield  Inclusion of 
Liquidity 
Premiu m 
Liquidity 
Premium 
Removed  
Term to 
Maturity  Term to 
Maturity  Inclusion of 
Liquidity 
Premium  
Liquidity 
Premium 
Removed   26 2.4.3.  Market segmentation theory  
According to the market segmentation theory, interest rates for different maturities are 
determined independently of one another. The interest ra te for short maturities is 
determined by the supply of and demand for short -term funds. Long -term interest rates are 
those that equate the sums that investors wish to lend long term with the amounts that 
borrowers are seeking on a long -term basis.  
Accordin g to market segmentation theory, investors and borrowers do not consider their 
short -term investments or borrowings as substitutes for long -term ones. This lack of 
substitutability keeps interest rates of differing maturities independent of one another. If  
investors or borrowers considered alternative maturities as substitutes, they may switch 
between maturities. However, if investors and borrowers switch between maturities in 
response to interest rate changes, interest rates for different maturities would no longer be 
independent of each other. An interest rate change for one maturity would affect demand 
andsupply, and hence interest rates, for other maturities.  
2.4.4.  The preferred habitat theory  
Preferred habitat theory is a variation on the market segmentation theory. The preferred 
habitat theory allows for some substitutability between maturities. However the preferred 
habitat theory views that interest premiums are needed to entice investors from their 
preferred maturities to other maturities.  
According to th e market segmentation and preferred habitat explanations, government can 
have a direct impact on the yield curve. Governments borrow by selling bills and bonds of 
various maturities. If government borrows by selling long -term bonds, it will push up 
long-term interest rates (by pushing down long -term bond prices) and cause the yield 
curve to be more upward sloping (or less downward sloping). If the borrowing were at the 
short maturity end, short -term interest rates would be pushed up.  
Question   
 What factors  influence the shape of the yield curve?  
2.5. Forward interest rates and yield curve  
The expectations that are relevant to investment decisions are expectations relative to 
market expectations. An active portfolio manager bases investment decisions on attempts  
to forecast interest rates more accurately than the average participant in the money market. 
For this reason the manager of an actively managed bond portfolio needs to be able to 
ascertain the market consensus forecast. Such market expectations can be ded uced from 
forward interest rates.  
Forward interest rates  are rates for periods commencing at points of time in the future. 
They are implied by current rates for differing maturities. For example, the current 3 -
month interest rate and the current 6 -month in terest rate between them imply a rate for a 3 -
month period which runs from a point in time three months from the present until a point 
in time six months hence.  
The forward 3 -month rate for a period commencing three months from the present is the 
rate whic h, when compounded on the current 3 -month rate, would yield the same return as 
the current 6 -month rate. For example if the 3 -month rate is 9% p.a. and the 6 -month rate 
is 10% p.a., the forward rate is shown as x in equation:  
(1,0225)(1 + x) =1,05   27 The forw ard rate is calculated as:  
x=(1,05/1.0225) - 1 = 0,0269  
which is 2.69% over three months and hence 10.76% p.a.  
The forward rate can be interpreted as the market expectation of the future interest rate 
under the assumptions that:  the expectations theory o f the yield curve is correct and there 
is no risk premium. If the expectations theory is seen as a good model, but there is a risk 
premium, an adjustment is required to remove the effects of the risk premium before the 
result can be interpreted as the mark et forecast of the future interest rate.  
 
Question   
 What is the meaning of the forward rate in the context of the 
term structure of interest rates?  
The yield curve  based on zero coupon bonds is known as the spot yield curve . It is 
regarded as more infor mative than a yield curve that relates redemption yields to 
maturities of coupon bearing bonds. The redemption date is not the only maturity date.  
 
Example  
 The one -year interest rate is 6,5% p.a. and the six -month 
interest rate is 6% p.a. What is the fo rward six -month 
interest rate for the period between six months and one year 
from now? Can this forward interest rate be taken to be the 
interest rate expected by money market participants?  
Let x be the forward interest rate p.a. (so that the rate for six 
months is x/2).  
(1,03)(1 + x/2) =1,065  
1 +x/2 =(1,065)/(1,03)  
x/2 =[(1,065)/(1,03)] -1 
x=2{ [(1,065)/(1,03)] -1} 
Therefore x=0,068, i.e. 6,8% p.a.  
The forward interest rate of 6,8% p.a. can be taken to be the 
market expectation if the expectations theory o f the yield 
curve is correct and there is no risk premium. If the 
expectations theory is correct but there is a risk premium, the 
risk premium must be removed before carrying out the 
calculation. Suppose that the six -month rate contains no risk 
premium, bu t the one -year rate contains a risk premium of 
0,1% p.a. The one -year interest rate, net of the risk premium, 
is 6,4% p.a. The new calculation would be as follows:  
(1,03)(1 + x/2) = (1,064)  
x=2{[(1,064)/(1,03)] -1} 
Therefore x=0,066, i.e. 6,6% p.a.  
Coupo n-bearing bonds may have differing redemption yields, despite having common 
redemption dates, because of differences in the coupon payments. Yield curves based on 
coupon -bearing bonds may not provide a single redemption yield corresponding to a 
redemption (final maturity) date.   28 Example  
 Suppose, z ero coupon bonds with maturities one, two, and 
three years from the present have prices of 95, 88, and 80 
Euro.  What are the spot one -, two -, and three -year interest 
rates?  Draw the yield curve.  
In the case of th e one -year bond, an investment of 95 Euro 
entails a receipt of 100 Euro in one year. 100/95 =1,0526 
which implies a spot one -year interest rate of 5,26%. In the 
case of the two -year bond, an investment of 88 Euro yields a 
receipt of 100 Euro after two year s. 
100/88 =1,13636  
√1,13636 =1,0660 or a spot 2-year interest rate of 6,60% p.a.  
b) In the case of the three -year bond, an investment of 80 
Euro provides a receipt of 100 Euro after three years.  
100/80 = 1,25  
1,250.33=1,0772 or a spot three -year interest r ate of 7,72% p.a.  
The forward yield curve  relates forward interest rates to the points of time to which they 
relate. For example, rates of return on five -year bonds and rates on four -year bonds imply 
rates on one year instruments to be entered into four years from the present. The implied 
forward rate can be calculated by means of the formula:  
(1 + 4r1) = (1 + 0r5)5 / (1 + 0r4)4  
where r 5 is the five -year interest rate, r 4 is the four -year interest rate, and 4r1 is the one -year 
rate expected in four years’  time.  
This formula arises from the relation:  
(1 + 0r5)5=(1 + 0r4)4 (1 +  4r1)  
which states that a five -year investment at the five -year interest rate should yield the same 
final sum as a four -year investment at the four -year rate with the proceeds reinves ted for 
one year at the one -year rate expected to be available four years hence. The value of 4r1 
would be related to the point in time, of four years, on the yield curve. Carrying out such a 
calculation for a succession of future periods produces a series  of forward interest rates.  
Question   
 Why might forward rates consistently overestimate future 
interest rates?  
 
Question   
 How liquidity premium affects the estimate of a forward 
interest rate?  
When plotted against their respective dates, the series of  forward rates produces a forward 
yield curve. The forward yield curve requires the use of zero coupon bonds for the 
calculations.  
This forms also the basis for calculation of short -term interest rate futures. Short -term 
interest rate futures, which freque ntly take the form of three -month interest rate futures, 
are instruments suitable for the reduction of the risks of interest rate changes. Three -month 
interest rate futures are notional commitments to borrow or deposit for a three -month 
period that commenc es on the futures maturity date. They provide means whereby  29 borrowers or investors can (at least approximately) predetermine interest rates for future 
periods.  
Example  
 Assume that the three -month interest rate is 4.5% p.a. and 
the six -month interest rate  is 5% p.a.  
What is the forward interest rate for the three -month period 
commencing three months from now?  
5% p.a. is 2,5% over six months, and 4,5% p.a. is 1,125% 
over three months.  
(1,025)/(1,01125) = 1,013597  
1.013597 - 1 = 0.013597, i.e. 1.3597% for t hree months or 
5.44% p.a. (to two decimal places).  
The forward interest rate is 5,44% p.a.  
 
2.6. Summary  
Level of interest rates in an economy is explained by two key economic theories: the 
loanable funds theory and the liquidity preference theory. The loanabl e funds theory states 
that the level of interest rates is determined by the supply of and demand for loanable 
funds. According to the liquidity preference theory, the level of interest rates is determined 
by the supply of and demand for money balances.  
Interest rates in the economy are determined by the base rate (rate on a Government 
security) plus a risk premium (or a spread). There are several factors that determine the 
risk premium for a non - Government security, as compared with the Government security  
of the same maturity.  These are (1) the perceived creditworthiness of the issuer, (2) 
provisions of securities such as conversion provision, call provision, put provision, (3) 
interest taxes, and (4) expected liquidity of a security’s issue.  
The term str ucture of interest rates shows the relationship between the yield on a bond and 
its maturity. The yield curve describes the relationship between the yield on bonds of the 
same credit quality but different maturities in a graphical way.  Apart from spot rat es, 
forward rates provide additional information for issuers and investors. The major theories 
explain the observed shapes of the yield curve are the expectations theory, liquidity 
premium, market segmentation theory and preferred habit theory.  
 
Key terms  
 Interest rates  
 Loanable funds  
 Spot rate  
 Forward rate  
 Term structure of interest rates  
 Yield curve  
 Expectations  
 Biased expectations  
 Liquidity  
 Segmented markets   30  Preferred habitat  
 
Further readings  
1. Culbertson J.M. (1957). The Term Structure of Interest Rates , Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, November, p. 489 -504. 
2. Estrella A., Mishkin F. S.  (1996). The yield curve as a predictor of U.S. 
recessions. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics 
and Finance.  
3. Favero C. A., Kaminska I., Söderström U. (2005). The predictie power of the 
yield spread: Further evidence and a structural interpretatio,. CEPR Discussion 
Paper, No. 4910.  
4. Kane E.J. (1970). The term structure of interest rates: An attempt to reconcile 
teaching with practice, Journal of Finan ce, Vol.25, May, p. 361 -374. 
5. Ron U. (2002). A practical guide to swap curve construction. Chapter 6 in F. J. 
Fabozzi (ed.)  Interest Rate, Term Structure, and Valuation Modeling . New  
York, John Wiley & Sons.  
Relevant websites  
 http://www.bloomberg.com  
 http://www.federalreserve.gov  
 http://www.ft.com  
 http://www.ecb.int/sta ts/money/yc/html/index.en.html  
 http://www.treas.gov/offices/domestic -finance/debt -management/interest -
rate/yield.shtml  
 http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/capital_markets/ycfaq.html  
 http://demonstrations.wolfram.com/PriceYieldCurve/  
 
Review questions and problems  
 How would you expect an increase in the propensity to save to affect the 
general level of interest rates in an economy?  
6. Explain how an increase in the rate of inflation might affect (a) real interest 
rates and (b) nominal interest rates.  
7. Why are some lend ers capital risk averse and others income risk averse? What 
slope will the yield curve have when the market is dominated by capital risk 
aversion?  
8. Why might interest rates payable on long -term, ‘risk -free’ government bonds 
include a term premium?  
9. Look at t he most recent interest rate change by European Central bank, US 
FED, Bank of England, Central Bank of Lithuanian, Central Bank of Latvia and 
Central Bank of Estonia. Compare them. What conclusions can be drawn?  
10.What conclusion might you draw about possibl e future interest rates if a 
positive term premium were to increase?  
11.Why might interest rate movements of various developed countries be more 
highly correlated in recent years than in earlier years?   31 12.Consider the prevailing conditions for inflation (includi ng oil prices), the 
economy, and the budget deficit, the central bank of your country and EU 
central bank monetary policy that could affect interest rates. Based on the 
prevailing conditions, do you think interest rates will likely increase during the 
following half a year? Provide arguments for your answer. Which factor do you 
think will have the largest impact on interest rates?  
13.Assume that a) investors and borrowers expect that the economy will weaken 
and that inflation will decline; b) investors require  a low liquidity premium; c) 
markets are partially segmented and the Government prefers to borrow in the 
short -term markets. Explain how each of the three factors would affect the term 
structure of interest rates, holding all other factors constant. Then e xplain the 
overall effect on the term structure.  
14.Assume that the yield curves in the US, Germany and Japan are flat. If the yield 
curve in the US suddenly becomes positively sloped, do you think the yield 
curves in Germany and Japan would be affected? If y es, how?  
15.A company X has funded its operations by bank loans extensively. The interest 
rate on the loans is tied to the market interest rates and is adjusted every six 
months. Thus the cost of funds is sensitive to interest rate movements. Because 
of expec tations that EU economy would strengthen during the next year, the 
company plans further growth through investments. The company expects that it 
will need substantial long -term financing to finance its growth and plans to 
borrow additional funds in the deb t market.  
a) What can be the company’s expectations about the change in interest rates 
in the future? Why?  
b) How would these expectations affect the company’s cost of borrowing on its 
existing loans and on future debt?  
c) How these expectations would affect the co mpany’s decision when to 
borrow funds and whether to issue floating -rate or fixed rate debt?  
16. Assume that the interest rate for one year securities is expected to be 4 percent 
today, 5 percent one year from now and 7 percent two years from now. Using 
only the pure expectations theory find what are the current (spot) interest rates 
on two and three year securities.  
17. Assume that the spot (annualized) interest rate on a three year security is 8 
percent, while the spot (annualized) interest rate on a two year s ecurity is 5 
percent. Use only this information to estimate the one year forward rate two 
years from now.  
18.Assume that the spot (annualized) interest rate on a two year security is 7 
percent, while the spot (annualized) interest rate on a one year security is 6 
percent.  
a) Using only this information estimate the one year forward rate.  
b) Assume that the liquidity premium on a two year security is 0,4 percent. Use 
this information to re -estimate the one year forward rate  
19.Assess the shape of the yield curve using the website http://www.ecb.int/stats/ 
money/yc/html/index.en.html . Based on various theories attempting to explain 
the shape of the yield curve, provide your explanations of the differen ce 
between the 1 year and the 30 year government securities. Which theory 
according to your opinion is the most reasonable? Why?   32 20.Consider how quickly other interest rates in the economy changed thereafter. 
Why does the MPC change interest rates each time i t acts by only 1/4 or, at 
most, 1/2 a per cent?  
21.Could the MPC of the Bank of England raise interest rates when everyone was 
expecting them to fall? Look at the financial press and find the current interest 
spread between five -year and ten -year government b onds. Is there a positive 
term premium?  
22.What conclusion might you draw about possible future interest rates if a 
positive term premium were to increase? How is money actually transferred 
from an account in one country to an account in another?  
23.Has the grow th of the Euromarkets been, on balance, a positive development for 
the world economy?  
24.How many reasons can you think up for preferring fixed to floating rate loans 
and vice versa?  
25.Find out as much as you can about:  
a) the activities of the international c redit rating agencies;  
b) the role of the international banks in the international debt crisis of the 
developing countries.  
26.What is:  
a) EURIBOR?  
b) a euroeuro?  
c) a swaption?  
d) a plain vanilla swap?  
27.Look in the financial press and find examples of variati ons on plain vanilla 
swaps that re not mentioned in the text.  
28.If you swapped a floating rate payment for a fixed rate payment, would you gain 
or lose if interest rates unexpectedly rose? Why?  
 
 
 
 
 
  33  
3. MONEY  MARKETS  
 
Mini contents   The purpose of money mark ets  
 Money markets segments and participants  
 Money market instruments  
 Money market rates  and yields  
 
3.1. Money market purpose and structure  
3.1.1.  The role of money markets  
The purpose of money markets  is facilitate the transfer of short -term funds from agents 
with excess funds (corporations, financial institutions, individuals, government) to those 
market participants who lack funds for short -term needs.  
They play central role in the country’s financial system, by influencing it through the 
country’s monetary autho rity.   
For financial institutions and to some extent to other non -financial companies money 
markets allow for executing such functions as:  
 Fund raising;  
 Cash management;  
 Risk management;  
 Speculation or position financing;  
 Signalling;  
 Providing access to i nformation on prices.  
Money markets are wholesale markets with very large amounts of transactions, e.g. with 
transactions from 500 million Euro to 1 billion Euro or even larger ones. This is the most 
active financial market in terms of volumes of trading.  
From the start of emergence the traditional money markets performed the role of 
monetary policy . In order to influence the supply side, governments have employed 
methods of direct regulation and control of the savings and investment behaviour of 
individual s and companies. However due to fast technological advances, 
internationalization and liberalization of financial markets, possibilities to carry out policy 
objectives through such measures have diminished. Current policy through market -
oriented measures i s aimed primarily at demand side. Thus money markets serve the 
interface between execution of monetary policy and the national economies   
Another role of domestic money markets is to serve public policy objectives, i.e. 
financing public sector deficits an d managing the accumulated government deficits. 
Government public debt policy is an important determinant of the money markets 
operations, since government debt typically forms a key part of the country’s money 
markets (as well as debt markets). The scope and measures of monetary policy are also 
linked to the government’s budget and fiscal policies. Thus the country’s money market  34 shifts are dependant upon the goals of national public policy and tools used to reach these 
goals.  
 Changes in the role and stru cture of money markets were also influenced by 
financial deregulation, which evolved as a result of recognition that excessive controls are 
not compatible with efficient resource allocation, with solid and balanced growth of 
economies. Money markets went t hrough passive adaptation as well as through active 
influence from the side of governments and monetary authorities.  
Finally, money markets were influenced by such international dimensions as 
increasing capital mobility, changing exchange rate arrangements , diminishing monetary 
policy autonomy. The shifts  in European domestic money markets were made by the 
European integration process, emergence and development of European monetary union.   
 
3.1.2.   Money market segments  
In a broad sense, money market  consists of the market for short -term funds, usually with 
maturity up to one year. It can be divided into several major segments:  
Interbank market , where banks and non -deposit financial institutions settle 
contracts with each other and with central bank, involving tem porary liquidity surpluses 
and deficits.  
Primary market , which is absorbing the issues and enabling borrowers to raise 
new funds.  
Secondary market  for different short -term securities, which redistributes the 
ownership, ensures liquidity, and as a result, i ncreases the supply of lending and reduces 
its price.  
Derivatives market – market for financial contracts whose values are derived 
from the underlying money market instruments.  
Interbank market  is defined mainly in terms of participants, while other market s are 
defined in terms of instruments issued and traded. Therefore there is a considerable 
overlap between these segments. Interbank market is referred mainly as the market for 
very short deposits and loans, e.g. overnight or up to two weeks. Nearly all ty pes of money 
market instruments can be traded in interbank market.  
Key money market segments by instruments are provided in Figure 6 
 
Figure 6. Key money market instruments  
 
The money -market instruments are o ften grouped in the following way:  
 Treasury bills and other short -term government securities (up to one year);   35  Interbank loans, deposits and other bank liabilities;  
 Repurchase agreements and similar collateralized short -term loans;  
 Commercial papers, issue d by non -deposit entities (non -finance companies, finance 
companies, local government, etc. ;  
 Certificates of deposit;  
 Eurocurrency instruments;  
 Interest rate and currency derivative instruments.  
All these instruments have slightly different characteristic s, fulfilling the demand of 
investors and borrowers for diversification in terms of risk, rate of return, maturity and 
liquidity, and also diversification in terms of sources of financing and means of payment. 
Many investors regard individual money market instruments as close substitutes, thus 
changes in all money market interest rates are highly correlated.  
Major characteristics of money market instruments  are:  
 short -term nature;  
 low risk;  
 high liquidity (in general);  
 close to money.  
Money markets consis t of tradable instruments  as well as non-tradable instruments . 
Traditional money markets instruments, which included mostly dealing of market 
participants with central bank, have decreased their importance during the recent period, 
followed by an increasin g trend to finance short -term needs by issuing new types of 
securities such as REPOs, commercial papers or certificates of deposit. The arguments 
behind the trend are the following:  
1. An observed steady shift to off -balance sheet instruments, as a reaction t o 
introduction of capital risk management rules for internationally operating banks in 
the recommendations of Basel II Accord and EU Directives on banking.  
2. Advantages provided to high -rated m arket participants, allowing to diversify 
borrowing sources, to c ut the costs, to reduce the borrowers’ dependence on 
banking sector lending and its limitations.  
In terms of risk two specific money -market segments  are: 
 unsecured debt instruments markets (e.g. deposits with various maturities, ranging 
from overnight to o ne year);  
 secured debt instruments markets (e.g. REPOs) with maturities also ranging from 
overnight to one year.  
Differences in  amount of risk  are characteristic to the secured and the unsecured 
segments of the money markets. Credit risk is minimized by li miting access to high -quality 
counter -parties. When providing unsecured interbank deposits, a bank transfers funds to 
another bank for a specified period of time during which it assumes full counterparty credit 
risk. In the secured REPO markets, this count erparty credit risk is mitigated as the bank 
that provides liquidity receives collateral (e.g., bonds) in return.  
Money markets structures differ across the countries, depending upon regulatory and 
legislative frameworks, factors that have supported or li mited the development of such  36 national markets. The influence of business culture and traditions, industrial structures 
have played an important role also.  
Economic significance of money markets is predetermined by its size, level of 
development of infras tructure, efficiency. Growth of government securities issues, their 
costs considerations, favourable taxation policies have become additional factors boosting 
some of the country’s money markets.  
 
3.1.3.  Money market participants  
Money market participants  includ e mainly credit institutions and other financial 
intermediaries, governments, as well as individuals (households).   
Ultimate lenders in the money markets are households and companies with a financial 
surplus which they want to lend, while ultimate borrower s are companies and government 
with a financial deficit which need to borrow. Ultimate lenders and borrowers usually do 
not participate directly in the markets. As a rule they deal through an intermediary, who 
performs functions of broker, dealer or invest ment banker.  
Important role is played by government , which issue money market securities and use the 
proceeds to finance state budget deficits. The government debt is often refinanced by 
issuing new securities to pay off old debt, which matures. Thus it ma nages to finance long -
term needs through money market securities with short -term maturities.  
Central bank  employs money markets to execute monetary policy. Through monetary 
intervention means and by fixing the terms at which banks are provided with money, 
central banks ensure economy’s supply with liquidity.  
Credit institutions  (i.e., banks) account for the largest share of the money market. They 
issue money market securities to finance loans to households and corporations, thus 
supporting household purchas es and investments of corporations. Besides, these 
institutions rely on the money market for the management of their short -term liquidity 
positions and for the fulfilment of their minimum reserve requirements.  
Other important market participants are other  financial intermediaries, such as money 
market funds , investment funds  other than money -market funds, insurance companies  and 
pension funds . 
Large non-financial corporations  issue money market securities and use the proceeds to 
support their current opera tions or to expand their activities through investments.  
In general issuance of money market securities allow market participants to increase their 
expenditures and finance economic growth.  
Money market securities are purchased mainly by corporations, fin ancial intermediaries 
and government that have funds available for a short -term period. . Individuals (or 
households) play a limited role in the market by investing indirectly through money 
market funds. Apart from transactions with the central bank, money -market participants 
trade with each other to take positions dependant upon their short -term interest rate 
expectations, to finance their securities trading portfolios (bonds, shares, etc.), to hedge 
their  longer -term positions with short -term contracts, and to reduce individual liquidity 
imbalances   37 3.2. Money market instruments  
3.2.1.  Treasury bills and other government securities  
Treasury bills are short -term money market instruments issued by government and backed 
by it. Therefore market participant view these gov ernment securities as having little or 
even no risk. The interest rates on Treasury securities serve as benchmark default -free 
interest rates. A typical life to maturity of the securities is from four weeks to 12 months. 
As they do not have a specified cou pon, they are in effect zero -coupon instruments and are 
issued at a discount to their par or nominal value, at which price they are redeemed. Any 
new issue with the same maturity date as an existing issue is regarded as a new tranche of 
the existing securi ty.  
Question  
 What are key characteristics of Treasury bills?  
Treasury bills are typically issued at only certain maturities dependant upon the 
government budget deficit financing requirements. Budget deficits create a challenge for 
the government. Large  volumes of Treasury securities have to be sold each year to cover 
annual deficit, as well as the maturing Treasury securities, that were issued in the past. The 
mix of Treasury offerings determines the maturity structure of the government’s debt.  
Primary  market.  The securities are issued via a regularly scheduled auction  process. 
Upon the Treasury’s announcement of the size of upcoming auction, tenders or sealed bids 
are being solicited.  
Concept  
 A tender  is a sealed bid.  
Bidders are submitting two type s of bids: competitive and non -competitive. A competitive 
bidder  specifies both the amount of the security that the bidder wants to buy, as well as 
the price that the bidder wants to pay. The price is set in terms of yield. The price of the 
securities in t he auction is set based on the prices offered in competitive bids, taking the 
average of all accepted competitive prices. Not all competitive bids that are tendered are 
accepted. Typically the longer the maturity, the greater would be the percentage of 
accepted bids. The percentage of accepted bids is determined by the size of the issue as 
compared to the amount of bids tendered. Competitive bidders are the largest financial 
institutions that generally purchase largest amounts of Treasury securities. In gen eral 80 -
90% Treasury securities are sold to them.  
A non- competitive bidder  specifies only the amount of the security that the bidder wants 
to buy, without providing the price, and automatically pay the defined price. Non -
competitive bidders are retail cus tomers, who purchase low volumes of the issues, and are 
not enough sophisticated to submit a bid price. Limits on each non -competitive bid can be 
set. Direct purchases of Treasury securities by individuals are limited in many countries. In 
such cases they use the services of dealers.  
The Figure 7 illustrates the results of sealed bid (tender) auction. The Treasury will accept 
the competitive bids with the highest price and lowest interest rates, and will reject other 
bids.  
Depending u pon the existing regulation in a specific country treasury security auctions can 
be organized and held at the central bank or stock exchanges.  
There are two  auction forms:  
 Uniform price auction , when all bidders pay the same price;   38  Discriminatory price auc tion, in which each bidder pays the bid price.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Prices in a sealed -bid auction  
The procedure of the discriminatory price auction  one is more sophisticated. At first, all 
the non -competitive bids are tot aled, and their sum is subtracted from the total issue 
amount. This way all non -competitive bids are fulfilled. The price, which non -competitive 
bidders are going to pay, is determined taking into account the results of the competitive 
part of the auction.  
Concept  
 Uniform price auction  is an auction, when all bidders pay 
the same price.  
 
Concept  Discriminatory price auction  is an auction, in which each 
bidder pays the bid price.  
Further on, all competitive tenders are ranked in order of the bid yield. In  order to 
minimize the governments borrowing costs, the lowest competitive bid is accepted first. 
As a result, the highest bid prices are accepted until the issue is sold out fully. The lowest 
rejected bid yield (or the highest accepted bid yield) is calle d stop yield . The 
corresponding price is called the stop-out price .  
During such a Treasury auction, each competitive bidder pays the price for the securities, 
which is determined by the yield that was bid.  The average yield  is the average of all 
accepted  competitive bids, weighted by the amounts allocated at each yield. All non -
competitive bidders pay the average yield.  Supply curve  Price  
Accepted 
bids 
Rejected 
bids 
Demand 
curve  
Amount of 
bonds  Price of 
lowest 
accepte
d bid   39 The discriminatory auction is characterized by  
 a tail  – the difference between the stop yield and the average yield;  
 a cover  – the rati o between the total amount competitive and non -competitive bids 
tendered and the total issue (i.e. the total amount of accepted bids). .  
A large cover indicates active market participation in an auction. Average cover can be 
evaluated in terms of a differ ence between maximum and minimum accepted bid yields (in 
basis points) A small tail shows that most competitive bidders provide similar evaluation 
of Treasury security issue, and thus pay nearly the same price for it. The larger the cover 
and the smaller t he tail, the more efficient is the Treasury auction.  
Concept  
 Basis point  is a very fine measure of interest rates, equal to 
one hundredth of one percentage point.  
In a discriminatory price auction the bidder’s price is determined by his own tender. A low  
bid, i.e. low yield and high offered price, increases the bidder’s chance of his bid to be 
accepted. However, this can lead to the possibility of the winner’s curse . In such a case 
the low bidder’s tender is accepted, but he pays a price that is higher th an of others lower 
priced (or higher yield) bids. Therefore competitive bidders may be reluctant to submit low 
bids, because this will oblige them to pay high prices for newly issued securities. This is a 
problem of discriminatory price auction.  
Concept  
 Winner’s curse  is the case, when the low bidder wins 
acceptance of the tender, but pays a price, which is higher 
than that of other lower bidders.  
A uniform price auction (or a Dutch auction)  does not have a problem of this kind. All the 
procedures of the  auction except for the last one are the same as in the discriminatory price 
auction. Each accepted bid pays the price of the lowest accepted bid.  
As a result, uniform price auction becomes more expensive to the Treasury and it receives 
lower revenue. Besi des, the average bidder may bid a higher price, shifting demand curve 
to right with the possibility offsetting the negative effect to the Treasury (see  Figure 8). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Impact of single -price auction upon demand curve  Price in single -
price auction  
Lowest accepted 
discriminatory bid  Supply curve  Price  
Accepted bid s Rejected bids  
Amount of 
bonds  Single -price 
demand  
Discriminatory 
demand   40 Uniform price auction is considered fairer because all competitive bidders pay the same 
price. This may encourage greater participation in the auction, and finally increase the 
auction’s cover indicator. Competitive bidders are  not afraid to submit too low bids, 
because they will not be paying the price they bid. Conversely, the lower they will bid, the 
higher likelihood is that their bid will be accepted. As a result, bidders tend to reduce their 
bids, thereby lowering the aver age yield on the entire issue. Such changes in bidder 
behaviour may offset the direct effect of higher issuer’s interest costs in the uniform price 
auction.  
While evaluating the effectiveness of the Treasury auction method, there is a concern, that 
competi tive as well as non -competitive bidders can be neglected, while few large financial 
institutions may be favoured. This can cause decline in auction participation, undermining 
the Treasury’s abilities to place large amounts of securities. On the other hand,  since 
bidders do not pay their tendered prices, the uniform price auction may be more subject to 
manipulation or collusion by informed bidders.   
Question  
 What is the role of competitive and non -competitive bidders 
in the Treasury securities auction?  
Secondary market.  Typically the Treasury securities have an active and liquid secondary 
market. The most actively traded issues, which are usually the ones sold through an 
auction most recently, are called on-the-run issues . They have narrower bid -ask spread s 
than older, off -the-run issues. The role of brokers and dealers is performed by financial 
institutions. As a rule, competitive bidders can submit more than one bid to each auction, 
with different prices and quantities on each tender. However, in well dev eloped markets 
limitations are being placed to the amount of securities in each auction allocated to a 
particular single bidder. The aim of such a rule is to prevent market from influence of a 
single bidder, and thus squeezing other financial institutions with their own customers.  
Question  
 What is the role of competitive and non -competitive bidders 
in the Treasury securities auction?  
The text then can follow (starting with the style of the first paragraph). Then, we can have 
some readings or an example. I t can be but in the same format as the Concept/Check 
Question.  
Price of a Treasury bill  is the price that an investor will pay for a particular maturity 
Treasury security, depending upon the investor’s required return on it. The price is 
determined as the present value of the future cash flows to be received. Since the Treasury 
bill does not generate interest payments, the value of it is the present value of par value. 
Therefore, since the Treasury bill does not pay interest, investors will pay a price for a 
one-year security that will ensure that the amount they receive one year later will generate 
the desired return.  
Example  
 Assume investor requires a 5 percent annualized return on a 
one-year Treasury bill with a 100000Euro par value. He will  
be willing  to pay the price  
P = 100000 Euro / 1,05 = 95238 Euro  
If investor requires a return higher than 5 percent, he will 
discount the par value at a higher return rate. This will result 
in a lower price to be paid today.   41  
In case the maturity of Treasury bill is shorter than one year, then the annualized return 
will be reduced by the fraction of the year, during which the investment is made.  The 
simplified calculations are provided in the example below.  
Example  
 Assume investor requires a 5 percent annualized  return on a 6 
month Treasury bill with a 100000 Euro par value. The price 
of the security will be  
P = 100000 Euro / ( 1 +  0,05 / 2) =  
= 100000 Euro / ( 1 + 0,025) = 97560,9 Euro  
If investor requires a return higher than 5 percent, he will 
discount the par value at a higher return rate. This will result 
in a lower price to be paid today.  
The price of the Treasury bill calculated on discount rate basis is:  
P = PAR  x  (1 - (d x n / 360))  
where d is the yield or rate of discount, PA R is par or maturity val ue and n is the number 
of days of the investment (holding period).  
Example  
 Assume investor requires an 8 percent annualized return on a 
91-day Treasury bill with a 100000 Euro par value. The price 
of the security will be  
P = 100000 Euro x ( 1 – (0,08 x 91/ 360) =  
= 100000 Euro x ( 1 –  0,02 ) = 98000 Euro  
If investor requires a return higher than 5 percent, he will 
discount the par value at a higher return rate. This will result 
in a lower price to be paid today.  
Yield of a Treasury bill  is determined taking into account the difference between the 
selling price and the purchase price. Since Treasury bills do not offer coupon payments, 
the yield the investor will receive if he purchases the security and holds it until maturity 
will be equal to the return  based on difference between par value and the purchase price. 
The annualized yield on Treasury bill  is calculated in the following way:  
y = (PA R - P) / P x (365/n)  
where d is the yield, PA R – par value, P - purchase price of the  Treasury bill  and n is th e 
number of days of the investment (holding period).  
Example  
 Assume investor requires pays 98000 Euro for a 91 -day 
Treasury bill with a 100000 Euro par value. The annualized 
yield of the security will be  
y = (100000 – 98000) / 98000 ) x ( 365 / 91 )  =  
= 0,02 x 4,01 = 0,0802 or 8,02 %.  
If the Treasury bill is sold prior to maturity, the return is calculated on the basis of 
difference between the price for which the bill was sold in the secondary market and the 
purchase price.  
The annualized yield on Treasury bill  is calculated in the following way:  
y = (SP  - P) / P x (365/n)   42 where d is the yield, SP  – selling price, P - purchase price of the  Treasury bill  and n is the 
number of days of the investment (holding period).  
In some countries (e.g. US) Treasu ry bills are quoted on a discount rate (or referred to as 
Treasury bill rate) basis. The Treasury bill discount rate represents the percent discount of 
the purchase price from par value of a new issue of a Treasury bill. It is determined in the 
following w ay: 
d = (PA R - P) / PA R x (360/n)  
where d is the yield, PA R – par value, P - purchase price of the  Treasury bill  and n is the 
number of days of the investment (holding period).  
In such a case the year is assumed having 360 days, and the number of days of the 
investment can be actual or an assumed convention. If a newly issued Treasury bill is held 
until maturity, then its yield is always greater than rate of discount. The difference is due 
to price or value used in denominator, since purchase price is alwa ys lower than par value. 
Besides, the yield is always calculated on 365 day during a year basis.  
 
3.2.2.  The interbank market loans  
Interbank market is a market through which banks lend to each other.  
Commercial banks are required to keep reserves on deposits w ithin central bank. Banks 
with reserves in excess of required reserves can lend these funds to other banks. 
Traditionally this formed the basis of the interbank market operations. However, currently 
these operations involve lending any funds in reserve acc ounts at a central bank.  
Concept  
 Interbank market is a market which involves bank 
borrowing and lending of any funds in reserve accounts at the 
central bank.  
In US the interbank market is the federal funds  market, which involves the borrowing and 
lendi ng any funds in reserve accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank (FED).  
The major characteristics  of the interbank markets are:  
 The transfer of immediately available funds;  
 Short time horizons;  
 Unsecured transfers.  
Individual banks have a possibility to invest  (lend)  surplus funds and have a source of 
borrowing when their reserves are low, thus they manage their reserve position and fund 
their assets portfolio by trading at the interbank market. This is a wholesale market with 
deals usually in large denominatio ns. It is used by all types of banks, involved in loans for 
very short periods, from overnight to fourteen days mostly. Then bank borrows in the 
interbank market, it is said to be a funds buyer. When bank lends immediately available 
reserve accounts, it is  said to be a seller. Most banks simultaneously buy and sell funds all 
the time. By acting as dealers they make markets for funds by announcing willingness to 
buy or to sell at the current competitive interbank rate.  
The interbank interest rates and intere st rates in the traditional market are interconnected. 
If banks are short of liquidity they will lend less to both markets and will cause interest 
rates to rise. When Central bank provides funds to the discount market, less attractive 
terms are offered by banks. Thus they may choose other markets to invest and will cause 
the drop in interest rates.   43 Interbank rates are generally slightly higher and more volatile than interest rates in the 
traditional market. In periods of great shortage of liquidity, the ne eds of banks which do 
not have sufficient funds to meet the central bank requirements drive up the overnight rates 
significantly.  
To keep up the speed of the transfer and the costs of transfer down, the interbank market 
transfers are unsecured, i.e. not b acked by any collateral and have no protection against 
default by the borrowing bank.  
Credit risk in the interbank market is controlled through the interbank rate, which is truly 
competitive, quoted market rate. It is determined entirely by the supply and demand of 
banks for funds. Since the market is a closed interbank system, the aggregate value of all 
buy orders (demand for funds) should be equal to the aggregate value of all sell orders 
(supply of funds). If the demand for fund purchases increases, it d rives up the interbank 
interest rate.  
Question  
 How is interbank interest rate determined?  
Participants in the interbank market typically undertake two types of transactions : 
 reserve management transactions;  
 portfolio management transactions.  
Bank reserv e management transactions allow complying with contemporaneous bank 
reserve requirements.  
Through portfolio management transactions banks use interbank market to finance their 
assets’ portfolio. These are encouraged by the interbank market liquidity and f lexibility. 
With time horizons as short as overnight, the transactions can be made rapidly at low 
transaction costs.  
Unlike other instruments ‘traded’ in the money markets, interbank deposits are not 
negotiable i.e. do not have a secondary market. A lendi ng bank which wishes to retrieve its 
funds simply withdraws the deposit from the bank to which it was lent. Thus, In this case, 
the distinction between primary and secondary markets is irrelevant.  
Question  
 How has the interbank interest rate volatility c hanged over 
the recent years? What is the major cause of this change?  
 
3.2.3.  Commercial papers  
Commercial paper (CP)  is a short -term debt instrument issued only by large, well 
known, creditworthy companies and is typically unsecured. The aim of its issuance is to 
provide liquidity or finance company’s investments, e.g. in inventory and accounts 
receivable.  
The major issuers  of commercial papers are financial institutions, such as finance 
companies, bank holding companies, insurance companies.  Financial compani es tend to 
use CPs as a regular source of finance. Non -financial companies tend to issue CPs on an 
irregular basis to meet special financing needs.  
Thus commercial paper is a form of short -term borrowing. Its initial maturity is usually 
between seven and f orty-five days. In US, the advantage of issuing CPs with maturities 
less than nine months is that they do not have to register with the Securities Exchange  44 Commission (SEC) as a public offering. This reduces the costs of registration with SEC 
and avoids de lays related to the registration process.  
CPs can be sold directly by the issuer, or may be sold to dealers who charge a placement 
fee (e.g. 1/8 percent). Since issues of CPs are heterogeneous in terms of issuers, amounts, 
maturity dates, there is no activ e secondary market for commercial papers. However, 
dealers may repurchase CPs for a fee.  
Question  
 What is the role of financial institutions in the commercial 
paper market?  
The price of CP is calculated in the following way:  
P = PAR  x  (1 - (d x n / 360 )) 
where d is the yield or rate of discount, PA R is par or maturity value and n is the number 
of days of the investment (holding period).  
CP is sold at a discount to its maturity value, thus it is the other money market instrument 
whose return is expressed  on a discount basis.  
Example  
 A 30 day CP with 10 million Euro par value yields 4,75% . 
The price of this CP currently offering is equal to  
P = 10,0 million Euro  x  (1 - (0,0475 x 30 / 360)) =  
= 10,0 million Euro  x  (1 - 0,003) = 9,97 million Euro  
The yie ld on CP is calculated in the following way:  
d = (PA R - P) / PA R x (360/n)  
where d is the yield or rate of discount, PA R – par value, P - initial price of the  CP and n is 
the number of days of the investment (holding period).  
Example  
 Investor has purchas ed a 30 day CP with a par value of 1 
million Euro for a price of 990 000 Euro. What is the yield of 
this CP investment?  
d = ( 1 mil Euro  - 990 000 Euro) / 1 mil Euro  x (360/30) =  
= 0,01 x 12 = 0,12 or 12 %.  
Commercial paper is normally unsecured  against an y specific assets and firms wishing to 
use the commercial paper market will usually seek a credit rating from one or other of the 
credit rating agencies. A high rating will mean that such paper can be issued at a smaller 
discount, often amounting to the eq uivalent of 1 per cent. Although commercial paper is 
unsecured, typically it is backed by a line of credit at a commercial bank.  
As a source of finance, commercial paper serves a similar purpose to commercial bills 
(and is priced in the same way). Thus, i n countries with a highly developed discount, or 
bills, market, the market for commercial paper is relatively small (e.g. UK). However, 
when the commercial bill market is less developed, the commercial paper market is very 
large (e.g. France and US). The m ain difference between commercial papers and 
commercial bills lies in the manner of their creation. A firm borrows via a commercial bill 
when it agrees to ‘accept’ a bill which is ‘drawn’ by a creditor. The bill originates with the 
lender. A firm borrows v ia commercial paper when it issues the paper itself.  
Question  
 What are the substitutes for commercial paper?   45  
3.2.4.  Certificates of deposit  
Certificate of deposit (CD)  states that a deposit has been made with a bank for a fixed 
period of time, at the end of w hich it will be repaid with interest.  
Thus it is, in effect, a receipt for a time deposit and explains why CDs appear in definitions 
of the money supply such as M4. It is not the certificate as such that is included, but the 
underlying deposit, which is a  time deposit like other time deposits.  
An institution is said to ‘issue’ a CD when it accepts a deposit and to ‘hold’ a CD when it 
itself makes a deposit or buys a certificate in the secondary market. From an institution’s 
point of view, therefore, issue d CDs are liabilities; held CDs are assets.  
The advantage to the depositor  is that the certificate can be tradable. Thus though the 
deposit is made for a fixed period, he depositor can use funds earlier by selling the 
certificate to a third party at a pric e which will reflect the period to maturity and the 
current level of interest rates.  
The advantage to the bank  is that it has the use of a deposit for a fixed period but, 
because of the flexibility given to the lender, at a slightly lower price than it wo uld have 
had to pay for a normal time deposit.  
The minimum denomination can be 100 000USD, although the issue can be as large as 1 
million USD. The maturities of CDs usually range from two weeks to one year.  
Non-financial corporations usually purchase nego tiable CDs. Though negotiable CD 
denominations are typically too large for individual investors, they are sometimes 
purchased by money market funds that have pooled individual investors’ funds. Thus 
money market funds allow individuals to be indirect inves tors in negotiable CDs. This way 
the negotiable CD market can be more active. There is also a secondary market for these 
securities, however its liquidity is very low.  
Concept  
 Negotiable certificates of deposit  are certificates that are 
issued by large co mmercial banks and other depository 
institutions as a short -term source of funds.  
The negotiable CDs must be priced offering a premium above government securities (e.g. 
Treasury bills) to compensate for less liquidity and safety. The premiums are generall y 
higher during the recessionary periods. The premiums reflect also the money market 
participants’ understanding about the safety of the financial system.  
Question  
 What factors lead to rise / decline in certificates of deposit 
market?  
Negotiable CDs are  priced on a yield  basis. Institution issue negotiable CDs at a par value.  
Thus the yield of the security is calculated:  
y = ( PAR  –  P )/ P  x (360 / n)  
Example  
 A three -month CD for 100 000 Euro at 6 per cent matures in 
73 days. It is currently tradin g at 99 000 Euro. Rate of return 
of this CD current offering is  
y = (100 000   –  99 000  )/ 99 000  x (360 / 73) =  
=  0,01  x  4,93 = 0,0493 or 4,93%  
  46 The market price of the CD is found by discounting the par or maturity value by the rate of 
interest cu rrently available on similar assets, adjusted for the residual maturity.  
The price  of CDs is determined using the following equation:  
P = PAR / (1 – (i x n / 360))  
Question  
 Find the price of a three -month 150,000 Euro CD, paying 4 
per cent, if it has 36  days to maturity and short -term interest 
rates are 4 per cent.  
What will be the price of this same CD if short -term interest 
rates fall to 2 percent?  
The annualized yield they pay is the annualized interest rate on negotiable CDs. If 
investors purchase a nd holds negotiable CDs until maturity, their annualized yield is the 
interest rate. However, if investors purchase or negotiable CDs in the secondary market 
instead of holding them from issuance to maturity, then annualized yield can differ from 
the annua lized interest rate.  
y = (Selling Price – Purchase Price + Interest) / Purchase Price  
Example  
 An investor purchased a negotiable CD a year ago in a 
secondary market. He redeems it today upon maturity and 
receives 1 million Euro. He also receives 40000 Eu ro of 
interest. What is investor’s annualized yield on this 
investment?  
The interest rate paid on CDs is often linked to interbank rate. If LIBOR is 4,75 per cent, 
for example, the CD described above might be paying 5 percent because it is quoted as 
payin g LIBOR plus 25 basis points.  
Certificates of deposit are an alternative of short -term, wholesale lending and borrowing. 
Three - and six -month maturities are common. Some CDs are issued for one year and even 
for two years but the market for these is compar atively thin. This has led to the practice of 
banks issuing ‘roll -over’ CDs, i.e. six -month CDs with a guarantee of further renewal on 
specified terms. CDs are issued by a wide variety of banks. It is quite common for a bank 
both to have issued and to hold  CDs, though normally of differing maturities. It will issue 
CDs with a maturity expected to coincide with a liquidity surplus and hold CDs expected 
to mature at a time of shortage.  
 
3.2.5.  Repurchase agreements  
A repurchase agreement (REPO)  is an agreement to bu y any securities from a seller 
with the agreement that they will be repurchased at some specified date and price in the 
future.  
Concept  
 Repurchase agreement (REPO) is a fully collateralize loan 
in wich the collateral consists of marketable securities.  
In essence the REPO transaction represents a loan backed by securities. If the borrower 
defaults on the loan, the lender has a claim on the securities. Most REPO transactions use 
government securities, though some can involve such short -term securities as c ommercial 
papers and negotiable Certificates of Deposit.  
  47 Since the length of any repurchase agreement is short -term, a matter of months at most, it 
is usually assumed as a form of short -term finance and therefore, logically, an alternative 
to other money market transactions.  
Concept  
 Open REPO is a REPO agreement with no set maturity date, 
but renewed each day upon agreement of both counterparties.  
 
Concept  
 Term REPO is a REPO with a maturity of more than one 
day.  
A reverse REPO  transaction is a purch ase of securities by one party from another with the 
agreement to sell them. Thus a REPO and a reverse REPO can refer to the same 
transaction but from different perspectives and is used to borrow securities and to lend 
cash.  
The participants of REPO transa ctions are banks, money market funds, non -financial 
institutions. The transactions can amount 10 million in USD terms with the maturity from 
one to 15 days and for one, three, six months. There is no secondary market for REPOs  
Since the effect of the REPO transactions influence money market prices and yields, it is 
normal to regard such REPOs as money market deals. In a REPO, the seller is the 
equivalent of the borrower and the buyer is the lender. The repurchase price is higher than 
the initial sale price,  and the difference in price constitutes the return to the lender.  
The amount of REPO loan is determined in the following way:  
REPO principal = Securities market value x ( 1 – Haircut )  
Securities market value = PAR x ( 1 – (d x n / 360 ))  
where the secu rities market value is determined as the current market value of these 
securities, d is the rate of discount of the securities, n is term of the securities, PAR is the 
par value of the securities.  
In the REPO transaction securities market value is equal t o the value of collateral, against 
which the borrowing takes place. Since the value of the securities may be fluctuating 
during the term of , the amount of the loan (the principal) is less than the current market 
value of the securities.  
The deduction fro m current market value of the securities collateral required to do the 
REPO transaction is made, which is call a haircut  or a margin . The haircut is a margin 
stated in terms of basis points. A standard haircut can be, e.g. 25 basis points (or 
0,0025%). Thu s a REPO loan is overcollateralized loan meaning that the amount of the 
collateral exceeds the loan principal and the haircut.  
Repurchase of the securities is made by repaying REPO loan and interest:  
REPO principal + Interest = REPO principal ( 1 + (y x t  / 360 ))  
where y is the yield or rate of the REPO transaction, t is the term of the REPO transaction.  
REPO principal = Securities market value x (1 – Haircut)  
Securities market value is defined as present value of the par value of the securities 
involved in the transaction.  
Concept  
 Haircut  – the function of a broker/ dealer’s securities 
portfolio, that cannot be traded, but instead must be held as 
capital to act as a cushion against loss.   48  
The haircut or margin offers some protection to the lender in ca se the borrower goes 
bankrupt or defaults for some other reason. The size of the risk, and thus this haircut / 
margin, depends in large part upon the status of the borrower, but it also depends upon the 
precise nature of the contract. Some REPO deals are g enuine sales. In these circumstances, 
the lender owns the securities and can sell them in the case of default. In some REPO 
contracts, however, what is created is more strictly a collateralized loan with securities 
acting as collateral while remaining in t he legal ownership of the borrower. In the case of 
default, the lender has only a general claim on the lender and so the haircut / margin is 
likely to be greater.  
Example  
 Consider a 90 day REPO transaction, with a REPO rate of 
4,75%. 180 days government securities with a rate of 
discount of 5% and a par value of 10 million Euro are used as 
collateral. Assume that the haircut is equal to 25 basis points. 
What is the amount of REPO loan? What is the amount of 
REPO loan repayment in the transaction?  
REPO de als are quoted on a yield  basis. The rate is quoted as a simple interest yield on a 
360 days basis set upon initiation of the transaction and fixed for the term of REPO.  
The REPO rate or yield is calculated:  
y =  ( PAR – P ) / P x (360 / t )  
where P is the  purchase price, PAR is the agreed repurchase price and t is the period of the 
transaction.  
Example  
 Investor has purchased securities at a price of 9 980 000 
Euro, with an agreement to sell them back at 10 million Euro. 
At the end of 15 days period. What  is the yield of the 
transaction?  
REPO transactions have two legs: 1) when cash is borrowed against collateral; 2) when 
REPO transaction takes place, i.e. securities are repurchased by repaying REPO loan plus 
interest.  
The repurchase of the securities (RE PO payment) is completely independent from the 
market value of the securities on the maturity date of the REPO. This reinforces the 
economic reality that REPO transaction is a collateralized loan.  
In a reverse REPO transaction the reverse payment is calcul ated:  
Reverse principal + Interest = Reverse principal x ( 1 + (y x t / 360))  
where y is the yield or REPO rate, t is maturity of the reverse REPO.  
Example  
 Assume a financial institution utilizes a reverse REPO to 
borrow securities and to lend cash. The securities collateral is 
1 million of par value government securities paying 6% p.a. 
semi annually with 5 years to maturity. A REPO rate is 4,5%, 
181 day of maturity, with a 50 basis points of haircut. What is 
the amount of reverse REPO repayment of the tr ansaction?  
REPO and reverse REPO markets  as well as number of their participants have grown up 
tremendously, especially due to increased sensitivity to interest rate risk and the 
opportunity cost of holding idle cash.  
  49 Question  
 What determines the size  of the REPO principal? What 
determines the size of the REPO repayment?  
REPO transactions are negotiated through a telecommunications network. Dealers and 
REPO brokers perform the role of financial intermediaries to create REPO transactions fro 
the compan ies with funds deficit or excess funds, and receive a commission for such 
services. However, direct REPO transaction is executed, when there is a possibility to find 
counterparty for it.  
Market participants  include central banks, financial institutions, n on-financial 
corporations.  
Central banks conduct short -term REPO transactions on bonds of any residual maturity as 
a means of influencing money market interest rates. ‘  
Non-financial companies, private financial institutions are more likely to utilize rev erse 
REPOs to earn interest on their cash balances during the periods of high interest rates. 
Speculative REPO and reverse REPO transactions are attractive to financial institutions 
with the increased volatility of interest rates. Money market funds often take the other side 
of REPO transactions and hold reverses in their assets portfolios as flexible short -term 
investment vehicles. Individuals, owning shares in these funds, earn interest on the 
reverses. The fund managers may speculate on interest rate flu ctuations using REPOs and 
reverse REPOs without being subject to the limitations on speculative derivative 
transactions. Important participants of the REPO market are security dealers. They make 
markets by carrying inventories of marketable securities, and  can use these securities as 
collateral on REPO loans. Thus they can reduce the cost of financing, utile REPOs to take 
positions on interest rates, finance their securities portfolios.  
Interest yields for REPOs of different terms reflect a term structure of interest rates which 
is a market consensus on forecasted interest rates. The REPO rate is significantly lower 
than other money market rates, however higher than the rate of government securities. It is 
maintained by possibility to substitute different m oney market instruments. There is no 
REPO secondary market.  
 
3.2.6.  International money market securities  
Apart from variety of money market instruments which enable short -term lending and 
borrowing to take place in the domestic currency, in recent years some of the fastest 
growing markets have been the so -called eurocurrency markets. These are markets in 
which the borrowing and lending denominated in a currency of some other country takes 
place. In general, eurocurrency market instruments are the same as other mo ney market 
instruments. When such instruments are denominated in some other currency, they are 
identified as ‘euro -’, though it can be any currency (e.g. US dollars, or Japanese yen). The 
trading can also take place anywhere (in European countries or in Ne w York or Tokyo or 
Hong Kong).  
Concept  
 Eurocurrency instrument  is any instrument denominated in 
a currency which differs from that of the country in which it 
is traded.  
The factor contributing to the long -term development of eurocurrency business was t he 
ability of eurobanks to offer their services at more competitive rates than domestic 
institutions. ‘Eurobanks’ are banks which specialize in eurocurrency business. They 
channel funds between surplus and deficit units and, and thus  create assets and lia bilities  50 which are more attractive to end -users than if they dealt directly with each other, also they 
help to use funds which might otherwise lay idle.  
In the Eurodollar market banks channel the deposited funds to other companies which 
need to receive Eur odollar loans. The deposit and loan transactions are of large 
denominations, e.g. exceeding 1 million USD. Therefore only governments and largest 
corporations can participate in the market. The market growth was influenced greatly by 
Eurocurrency liabiliti es of financial institutions are the following:  
 Euro Certificates of deposits  
 Interbank placements  
 Time deposits  
 Call money  
Euro certificates of deposits (Euro CDs)  are negotiable deposits with a fixed time to 
maturity.  
Time deposits  are non negotiable dep osits with a fixed time to maturity. Due to illiquidity 
their yields tend to be higher than the yields on equivalent maturity of negotiable Euro 
certificates of deposits.  
Interbank placements are short -term, often overnight, interbank loans of Eurocurrency  
time deposits.  
Call money  are non negotiable deposits with a fixed maturity that can be withdrawn at any 
time.  
Eurocurrency assets  of financial institutions are the following:  
 Euro Commercial Papers (Euro CPs)  
 Syndicated Euroloans  
 Euronotes   
Euro Commerci al Papers (Euro CPs) are securitized short -term bearer notes issued by a 
large well -known corporation.  They are issued only by private corporations in short 
maturities with the aim to provide short -term investments with a broad currency choice for 
interna tional investors. Most issues are pure discount zero coupon debt securities with 
maturities from 7 to 365 days. Issuance may be conducted through an appointed panel of 
dealers.It can be resold in a highly liquid secondary market. The issuers should be high ly 
rated as Euro CPs are unsecured.  
Syndicated Euroloans are related to bank lending of Eurocurrency deposits to non -
financial companies with the need for funds. Since they are non -negotiable, banks used to 
hold the syndicated loans in their portfolios un til they mature. Due to their illiquidity, the 
loans are often made jointly by a group of lending banks, which is called a syndicate. The 
role of syndication is to share loan risks among the banks that members of the syndicate.  
Euronotes  are unsecuritized debt instruments, substitutes for non -negotiable Euroloans. 
They are short –term, most often up to one year. Floating rate notes (FRNs) offer a 
variable interest rate that is reset periodically, usually seminannually or quarterly, 
according to some predete rmined market interest rate (e.g. LIBOR). For a high rated issuer 
the interest rate can be set lower than LIBOR.  
  51 3.3. Money market interest rates and yields  
Short -term money market instruments have different interest rate and yield quoting 
conventions. The yie ld on short -term money market instruments is often calculated using 
simple interest as opposed to compound interest, and as a result is not directly comparable 
with the yields to maturity.  
Short -term government securities (Treasury bills), commercial pape rs are often quoted and 
traded on a ‘discount’ basis, while interbank loan rates, REPO rates are quoted on an “add -
on” basis.  
Besides, it is a convention in the US Treasury bills market to assume that a year has 360 
days, while if it is denominated in ste rling it has 365 days, even in a leap year. Short -term 
money market instruments frequently do not have a specified coupon and as a result 
investors in them obtain a return by buying them at a discount to their par or maturity 
value.  
Below is provide the co mparison of different money market rates and yields.  
 
1) Rate on a discount basis  
d =  ( PAR – P ) / PAR x (360 / t )  
where d is the yield on the basis of  rate of discount, PA R – par value, P – the purchase 
price of the  security and t is the number of days u ntil maturity.  
Discount is calculated in this case as a percent from par value. It also assumes a 360 days 
year.  
Example  A 90 day US dollar Treasury bill is issued at 99% of its par 
value. It will be redeemed at its par value (100 %) 90 days 
after issue. It is traded on a discount basis. The discount of 
this issue  is:  
d = (100 − 99) / 100 × 360 / 90 = 4%  
Note that in the US dollar money market a year is assumed to 
have 360 days.  
The discount is often converted into a yield so as to make it comparable with other money 
market instruments. This yield is often called a ‘m oney market yield’. Using the above 
example, the money market yield is just 4 × 100 /99 = 4 .0404 %.  
 
2) Add-on rate  
y =  ( PAR – P ) / P x (360 / t )  
where y is the yield on the basis of  add -on rate, PA R – par value, P - the purchase price of 
the security and  t is the number of days until maturity.  
Example  
 Assume 990 000 Euro is lent for a 90 day period at the add -
on rate. The par value is 1000 000 Euro.  
The annualized yield of the security at an add -on basis will be  
y = (1000000 – 990000) / 990000 ) x ( 3 60 / 90 )  =  
= 0,0404 or 4,04 %.  
  52 3) Bond -equivalent yield  
y =  ( PAR – P ) / P x (365 / t )  
where y is the yield, PA R – par value, P - the purchase price of the  security and t is the 
number of days until maturity.  
Example  
 Assume the same 90 day US dollar  Treasury bill issued at 
99% of its par value. It will be redeemed at its par value (100 
%) 90 days after issue. The bond equivalent yield this issue  
is: 
y = (100 − 99) / 99 × 365 / 90 = 4, 097%  
The bond equivalent yield is used to compare Treasury bill yields with the yields to 
maturity of coupon bearing Treasury notes and bonds. The bond equivalent yield is is an 
approximation of the yield to maturity o f a bond.  
The bond equivalent yield is higher than the discount rate. The difference is larger for 
longer maturities and for higher levels of discount rate d. Therefore an error of yield using 
discount rate d increases for longer maturities and for higher  rates.  
 
4) Annual yield to maturity  
y =  ( PAR  / P ) (365 / t ) – 1 
where y is the yield, PA R – par or maturity value, P - the purchase price of the  security 
and t is the number of days until maturity.  
Example  
 Assume the same 90 day US dollar Treasury bil l issued at 
99% of its par value. It will be redeemed at its par value (100 
%) 90 days after issue.  
Annual yield to maturity of this money market instrument is:  
y = ( 100 / 99) (365 / 90) - 1 = 4, 097%  
 
5) Semiannual yield to maturity  
y =  2 x ( PAR  / P ) (365 /2 t ) – 2 
where y is the yield on the basis of  add -on rate, PA R – par or maturity value, P - the 
purchase price of the  security and t is the number of days until maturity.  
Example  
 Assume the same 90 day US dollar Treasury bill issued at 
99% of its  par value. It will be redeemed at its par value (100 
%) 90 days after issue.  
The semiannual yield to maturity of this money market 
instrument is:  
y = 2 x ( 100 / 99) (365 /2x 90) - 2 = 4, 097%  
 Comparison of all the money markets rates and yields are pr ovided in Figure 9.  
It shows that the largest is always the annual yield, which is then followed by semiannual 
yield, bond equivalent yield, the yield on the basis of add -on rate and the yield on discount 
basis. The difference betwee n bond equivalent yield and the semiannual yield are smaller 
for longer maturities and approach as the maturity approaches half a year. The longer the 
maturity, the smaller is the difference between bond equivalent yield and the annual yield.  53 Finally, the longer the maturity, the larger are the differences between the money market 
discount rate and other rates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Money market rates and yields  
Several specific money market interest rates are used in Europe.  
The key European Central Bank (ECB) interest rate is the minimum bid rate, which 
represents the price floor, which ensures central bank liquidity in the open -market 
operations. The two other key interest rates, on the marginal lending facility and the 
deposi t facility, define the corridor within which the overnight interest rate can fluctuate.  
The Governing Council of the ECB sets the level of the minimum bid rate in the 
Eurosystem’s weekly main refinancing operations (MROs). Through the MROs, the ECB 
aims t o supply the liquidity necessary for the banking system to operate smoothly. This 
way very short -term money market interest rates are aligned with the monetary policy of 
the ECB. Through the money -market yield curve, monetary policy is transmitted to 
finan cial instruments and credit conditions more generally, which in turn will influence 
saving and investment decisions and thus will affect price developments in the euro area.  
When money market is affected by crisis in the financial markets, the ECB needs to  
provide additional liquidity in order to support market confidence.  
Apart from the ECB interest rates, there are other main market interest rates for the money 
market:  
 EONIA (euro overnight index average).  The EONIA is the effective overnight 
reference ra te for the euro. It is computed daily as a volume -weighted average of 
unsecured euro overnight lending transactions in the interbank market, as reported 
by a representative panel of large banks.  
 EURIBOR (euro interbank offered rate).  The EURIBOR is the ben chmark rate 
of the large unsecured euro money market for maturities longer than overnight (one 
week to one year) that has emerged since 1999. It is based on information provided 
by the same panel of banks.    90 180 Days  Discount rate  Add-on rate  Annual Semiannual 
Bond equivalent yield  Rate  54  EUREPO  (the REPO market reference rate for the eur o) for different maturities. 
The EUREPO is the benchmark rate of the euro REPO market and has been 
released since March 2002. It is the rate at which one prime bank offers funds in 
euros to another prime bank when the funds are secured by a REPO transactio n 
using general collateral.  
 The rate of interest paid on interbank loans in London (UK) is known as London 
InterBank Offer Rate or LIBOR . It is an important reference to banks of the cost 
of raising immediate marginal funds. Numerous bank interest rates ar e therefore 
tied to LIBOR, particularly to the rate for three -month deposits.  
The spreads among the key ECB interest rates and short -term market interest rates are low. 
E.g., EONIA is mostly slightly above, but very close to, the minimum bid rate. The smal l 
spread (about 6 to 7 basis points) reflects that the EONIA is an unsecured interbank rate. It 
includes a small premium for credit risk and transaction costs. Larger spreads normally 
occur at the end of the reserve maintenance period when there is a need for the banks to 
fulfil the reserve requirement.  
The yields of money market securities are closely monitored by money market 
participants. Since money market securities are seen as close substitutes, investors may 
exchange them to achieve more attractive yields. This causes yields among the securities 
to come closer. If there is a difference between yields, investors will avoid lower yielding 
instruments and will favour the ones with high -yield. During the periods of larger 
uncertainty about the economy, i nvestors tend to shift from more risky money market 
securities to Treasury bills and other government securities.  
 
3.4. Summary  
Money market securities short -term instruments, which have maturities shorter than one 
year. Trading with these securities in interba nk, primary and secondary markets are very 
active. The volume of transactions in national markets as well as international markets is 
large. A variety of money market securities allow to meet special needs of borrowers and 
lenders.  
 
Key terms  
 Money market  
 Commercial paper  
 Certificate of deposit  
 REPO  
 Treasury bills  
 Interbank market  
 
Further readings  
1. Bernanke B., Blinder A. (1992). The FF rate and the channels of monetary 
transmission, Journal of Banking and Finance, No. 16, p. 585 -623. 
2. European Central Bank (2007). Euro Money Market Survey, ECB, Frankfurt am 
Main.   55 3. European Central Bank (2008). The Analysis of the Euro Money Market from a 
Monetary Policy Perspective, ECB Monthly Bulletin, February.  
4. Hartmann P., Manna M.,  Manzanares A. (2001). The Microstructu re of the 
Euro Money Market, ECB Working Paper 80.  
5. International Capital Market Association (2007). European REPO Market 
Survey, Number 12, conducted December 2006, Zürich, ICMA.  
6. Wolswijk G., de Haan J. (2005). Government Debt Management in the Euro 
Area: Recent Theoretical Developments and Changes in Practices, ECB 
Occasional Paper 25.  
 
Relevant websites  
 http://news.ft.com/home/uk  
 http://www.bankofengland.co.uk  
 http://www.ecb.int/pub  
 http://www.bis.org/publ  
 
Review questions and problems  
1. How do money markets differ from capital markets?  
2. Who are the main participants of money mark ets? 
3. What is the difference between money market instruments quoted ‘on a discount 
basis’ and ‘on a yield basis’?  
4. How are government securities (e.g. Treasury - bills) priced?  
5. How are commercial papers priced?  
6. How are certificates of deposit priced?  
7. How a re REPO agreements priced?  
8. Assume that one -month government security and one -month CDs are both 
quoted as having a yield of 5 per cent. Which gives the higher yield to an 
investor?  
9. Suppose that long -term interest rates are expected to fall in future. How i s this 
to influence the supply of commercial paper and why?  
10. Assume that the government makes a major sale of bonds to the private sector. 
Explain the likely effect on  
a) liquidity of the banking system;  
b) demand for money market instruments.  
11. Imagine th at the central bank is concerned about the rate of growth of credit in 
the economy. Explain how it might use its position in the REPO market to 
address this problem.  
12. How can the central bank of a country use REPOs on government bonds to 
raise interest ra tes from 4,5 percent to 5 percent?   56 13. A money market security with the par value of 100000 Euro is selling for 
881600 Euro. What is required return of investor, if the security has two years 
until maturity?  
14. Government is selling its 91 days securities with the face value of 1 000 000 
Euro for 880 000 Euro.  
a) What is the yield on the investment, if the bank invests and holds the 
securities until maturity?  
b) How can the annualized yield be affected if the purchase price is lower?  
c) How can the annualized yield be a ffected if the selling price is lower? 
Explain the logic of the relationship.  
d) How would the annualized yield be affected if the number of holding days 
is shorter, but the purchase price and the selling price is constant? Explain the 
relationship.  
15. A compan y has received a substantial loan from commercial banks. The 
interest rate on the loans is tied to market interest rates and is adjusted every six 
months. The company has obtained a credit line to satisfy temporary funds 
needs. Besides, in order to solve u nexpected liquidity problems, it can sell short -
term government securities, which it has bought half a year ago. The economic 
forecasts are rather optimistic, thus in order to satisfy the rising demand, the 
company may be in need to increase its production  capacity by about 40 percent 
over the next two years. However, the company is concerned about potential 
slow down in the economy due to possible actions of European central bank 
aimed at sustaining the inflation rate low.   The company needs funding to co ver 
payments to suppliers. It is also considering other possibilities of financing in 
the money market. The interest rate that the company is paying for its line of 
credit is less than the prevailing commercial paper interest rate of highly rated 
companies .  
a) Should the company issue commercial paper on this prevailing interest rate?  
b) Should the company sell its holding of government securities to cover the 
payments to suppliers?  
c) Should the company use its credit line?  
d) Which alternative has the lowest cost for the company? Provide the 
reasoning.  
 
  57 4. DEBT  MARKETS  
 
Mini contents   The characteristics of debt markets  
 The characteristics of debt instruments  
 Valuation of bonds  
 Bond duration and convexity  
 Callable bonds and other bond instruments  
 
4.1. Debt market instr ument characteristics  
Debt markets are used by both firms and governments to raise funds for long -term 
purposes, though most investment by firms is financed by retained profits. Bonds are long -
term borrowing instruments for the issuer.  
Major issuers of bo nds are governments (Treasury bonds in US, gilts in the UK, Bunds in 
Germany) and firms, which issue corporate bonds  
Corporate as well as government bonds vary very considerably in terms of their risk. Some 
corporate bonds are secured against assets of th e company that issued them, whereas other 
bonds are unsecured. Bonds secured on the assets of the issuing company are known as 
debentures. Bonds that are not secured are referred to as loan stock. Banks are major 
issuers of loan stock. The fact that unsecu red bonds do not provide their holders with a 
claim on the assets of the issuing firm in the event of default is normally compensated for 
by means of a higher rate of coupon payment.  
Important characteristics of bonds  involve:  
The conventional or straight  bond has the following characteristics:  
Residual maturity (or redemption date ). As time passes, the residual maturity of 
any bond shortens. Bonds are classified into ‘short -term’ (with lives up to five 
years); ‘medium -term’(from five to fifteen years) ; ‘ long-term’(over fifteen years).  
Bonds pay a fixed rate  of interest, called coupon. It is normally made in two 
installments, at six -monthly intervals, each equal to half the rate specified in the 
bond’s coupon.  
The coupon divided by the par value  of the bo nd (100 Euro) gives the coupon 
rate on the bond.  
The par or redemption value  of bonds is commonly 100 Euro (or other currency). 
This is also the price at which bonds are first issued.  
However, since the preparations for issue take time, market conditions  may change 
in such a way as to make the bonds unattractive at their existing coupon at the time 
they are offered for sale. They will then have to be sold at a discount to 100 Euro, 
in order to make the coupon rate approximate the market rate of interest.  If, vise 
versa, the market interest rates fall, the coupon may make the bond attractive at a 
price above 100 Euro. In these cases the issuers are making a last -minute 
adjustment to the price which they hope will make the bonds acceptable to the 
market.  
Bond prices fluctuate inversely with market interest rates . If market rates rise, 
people prefer to hold the new, higher -yielding issues than existing bonds. Existing  58 bonds will be sold and their price will fall. Eventually, existing bonds with various 
coupo ns will be willingly held, but only when their price has fallen to the point 
where the coupon expressed as a percentage of the current price  approximates the 
new market rate.  
The yield on bonds  are expressed commonly in two forms:  
 redemption yield;  
 inter est yield or running yield . 
Concept  
 Interest yield (or running yield) - the return on a bond 
taking account only of the coupon payments.  
 
Concept  
 Yield to maturity or redemption yield : The return on a 
bond taking account of the coupon cash flows and the  capital 
gain or loss at redemption.  
The types of bonds  include:  
Callable and putable bonds. Callable bonds can be redeemed at the issuer’s discretion 
prior to the specified  maturity  (redemption) date. Putable bonds can be sold back to the 
issuer on speci fied dates,  prior to the redemption date.  
Convertible bonds. These are usually corporate bonds, issued with the option for holders 
to convert into some other asset on specified terms at a future date. Conversion is usually 
into equities in the firm, though  it may sometimes be into floating rate notes.  
Eurobonds . Eurobonds are bonds issued in a country other than that of the currency of 
denomination. Thus bonds issued in US dollars in London are eurobonds, as are yen bonds 
issued in New York. The bonds thems elves may be straights, that is fixed -interest, fixed 
redemption bonds like the sterling ones described above, or they may come in any of the 
variations listed here. Eurobonds are issued by governments but more usually by 
corporations.  
Euro bonds. These a re bonds denominated in euros and issued in the euro currency area. 
If bonds denominated in euros would be issued outside the euro currency area, they would 
be euro eurobonds.  
Floating rate notes (FRNs) . These are corporate bonds where the coupon can be a djusted 
at pre -determined intervals. The adjustment will be made by reference to some benchmark 
rate, specified when the bond is first issued. An FRN might specify, for example, that its 
coupon should be fifty basis points above six -month treasury bill rat e, or six -month 
LIBOR, adjusted every six months. FRNs are, in part, a response to high and variable 
inflation rates.  
Foreign bonds. These are corporate bonds, issued in the country of denomination, by a 
firm based outside that country. Thus, a US firm mig ht issue a sterling bond in London.  
Index -linked bonds. These are corporate bonds where the coupon can be adjusted to high  
and variable rates of inflation. While other bonds have a maturity (redemption) value fixed  
in nominal terms and therefore suffer a decline in real value as a result of inflation,  both 
the value and the coupon of an index -linked bond are uprated each year in line  with lagged 
changes in a specified price index.  
Junk bonds.  Junk bonds are corporate bonds  whose issuers are regarded by bo nd credit 
rating agencies as being of high risk. They will carry  a rate of interest at least 200 basis 
points above that for the corresponding bonds  issued by high -quality borrowers.   59 Strips. Stripping refers to the breaking up of a bond into its component coupon payments  
and its maturity (redemption) value. Thus a ten -year bond, paying semi -annual coupons, 
would  make twenty -one strips. Each strip is then sold as a zero -coupon bond. That is, it  
pays no interest but is sold at a discount to the payment that w ill eventually be  received. In 
this sense, it is like a long -dated bill. The strips are  created from conventional bonds.  
 
4.2. Bond market  
4.2.1.  Bond market characteristics  
Debt markets include:  
primary markets for bonds, i.e. the markets in which newly issued instr uments are 
bought,  
secondary markets , in which existing or second hand instruments are traded.  
Majority of world bond markets have different institutional arrangements for the issue and 
trading of government bonds and corporate bonds. The reason is that governments should 
be able to sell the debt, which they use for budgetary and other purposes. Thus an active 
market with high rated participants should be ensured. Therefore government bond 
markets are subject to high level of supervision and regulation by  the central bank.  
For governments bonds are the main instrument (mainly central governments, but also 
regional and local government authorities, and social securities funds) to finance their 
budget deficits. This is true especially for within the euro are a countries. Besides, 
government bonds often serve as a benchmark for pricing other assets and they are also 
frequently used as collateral in various financial transactions.  
In governments debt securities issues form the most important market segment, foll owed 
by debt securities issued by financial institutions (consisting of monetary financial 
institutions (MFIs) and non -MFI financial institutions), and those issued by non -financial 
corporations. Monetary financial institutions include all financial instit utions whose 
business is (1) to receive deposits and/or close substitutes for deposits from entities other 
than MFIs and (2) to grant for their own account credit and/or invest in securities..  
The non -government bond market is dominated by bank debt securi ties. This segment 
includes different types of bonds, including unsecured bank debt securities and covered 
bonds .  
Concept  
 Covered bonds  are claims of the bond holders against the 
issuing MFI that are secured by a pool of cover assets on the 
MFI’s balance  sheet, such as mortgage loans or loans to the 
public sector. . 
The introduction of the euro in 1999 had a major impact on the operations of government -
debt managers as the disappearance of exchange rate risks within the euro area created the 
conditions f or a pan -European capital market. As a result, debt managers became players 
in a larger European market. Investors turned their focus more on credit risk and liquidity, 
while bond portfolios have become increasingly internationally diversified, especially in 
the smaller euro -area countries. Consequently, competition among debt managers has 
increased, stimulating a more efficient primary market and a deeper, more liquid 
secondary market. Governments have put great effort into making their outstanding debt 
and new issues more attractive to international bond investors. In addition to local systems, 
the European electronic platform for government securities, EuroMTS, was introduced in 
1999, enabling quotation and trading of some European benchmark bonds   60  
4.2.2.  Bond m arket  yields  
Bond yields are influenced by interest -rate expectations, the term premium, credit risk and 
liquidity.  
Risk-averse investors demand a risk premium (term premium) for investments in long -
term bonds to compensate them for the risk of losses due  to interest rate hikes; those losses 
increase with bond duration. The term premium leads to a positive term spread, i.e., the 
spread of yields for bonds with longer maturity over yields for bonds with shorter 
maturity, even when markets expect increasing and decreasing interest rates to be equally 
likely.  
Liquidity is one of the key characteristics of the bond market.  
Liquidity  is the ease with which an investor can sell or buy a bond immediately at a price 
close to the mid -quote (i.e., the average of the  bid–ask spread).  
A liquid market  allows market participants to trade at low trading costs. Kyle ( 1985 ) 
identifies three dimensions of liquidity:  
 tightness: the cost of turning around a position during a short period. Tightness in 
essence refers to a low b id–ask spread;  
 depth: a market is deep if only large buy or sell orders can have an impact on 
prices;  
 resiliency: a market is resilient if market prices reflect ‘fundamental’ values and, in 
particular, quickly return to ‘fundamental’ values after shocks.  
The spread between the yield of a bond with liquidity and a similar bond with less liquidity 
is referred to as the liquidity premium  
Credit risk is the risk of loss because of the failure of a counterparty to perform according 
to a contractual arrangement, for instance due to a default by a borrower. The spread 
between the yield of a particular bond and the yield of a bond with similar characteristics 
but without credit risk is the credit -risk premium. Rating agencies – like Moody’s, 
Standard & Poor’s, and F itch – indicate issuers’ credit risk by assigning them a rating.  
.Credit risk  and liquidity premia  of euro -denominated bonds are typically calculated as 
the spread of the bond yields over those of German government bonds. There are two 
reasons for this. Fi rst, German government bonds have consistently received the highest 
ranking from the three main rating agencies, indicating that German government bonds are 
associated with zero or very low credit risk. Second, German government bonds are very 
actively tra ded, ensuring that they are very liquid.  
Yield differentials vary considerably across countries, while for each country the yield 
differential varies considerably over time. Pagano and Von Thadden ( 2008 ) discuss studies 
that try to explain these yield diff erentials, arguing that they may arise from (1) intrinsic 
differences in country -specific default risk or different sensitivities of bonds’ future 
payoffs to common shocks, or (2) market frictions, like trading costs, clearing and 
settlement fees, and taxe s.  
They state that credit risk explains a considerable portion of cross -country yield 
differences but explains very little of their variation over time.  
  61 4.3. Bond valuation  
4.3.1.  Discounted models  
The fair value or fair price of a bond is based on the present value  of expected future cash 
flows. The general formula for estimating the fair price of a bond is:  
P = C/(1+r) +C/(1+r)2 + C/(1+r)3 +. . .+ C/(1 + r)n + B/(1+r)n    
where P is the fair price of the bond (its dirty price, which includes accrued interest), C is  
the regular coupon payment each period, B is the money value to be paid to the 
bondholder at maturity (redemption), r is the rate of discount per period, and n is the 
number of periods to maturity (redemption).  
Example  
 A bond pays a coupon of 4 Euro eve ry six months, and 100 
Euro will be repaid at maturity. There are two years to 
maturity and the next coupon is due in six months. The 
redemption yield  on similar bonds is 6% p.a. Estimate the fair 
price of the bond.  
An interest rate of 6% p.a. indicates a rate of 3% per six -
month period.  
P = 4/(1,03) + 4/(1,03)2 + 4/(1,03)3 +4/(1,03)4 + 100/(1,03)4 
P = 3,88 + 3,77 + 3,.66 + 3,55 + 88.85 = 103,71 Euro  
Typically a single rate, the redemption yield or redemption yield , is applied to discounting 
all future cas h flows. The redemption yield of a bond could be viewed as an average of 
discount rates applicable to the various future cash flows. The redemption yield indicates 
the average annual return to be received by an investor holding a bond to maturity.  
The rate  of discount is the required rate of return from a bond. The required rate of return 
can be regarded as the sum of the yield on bonds that are free of default risk (government 
bonds) and a risk premium to reflect the default risk of the bond being valued. High 
default risk entails a high required rate of return and hence a high discount rate.  
Therefore, for any particular stream of future cash flows, high risk bonds would have 
higher rates of discount and hence lower fair prices than low risk bonds. Thus, bond prices 
have an inverse relationship to interest rates, and second, that they have an inverse 
relationship to the risk of default. High interest rates and high risk are associated with low 
prices.  
An important distinction when considering bond prices is between the clean and dirty 
prices. When a bond is purchased, the buyer must include in the purchase price a sum 
corresponding to the seller’s share of the next coupon. If the coupon is paid six -monthly, 
and the bond is sold three months after the last coupon payment date, the seller would 
require the price to include half the next coupon so that holding the bond for the previous 
three months provides an interest yield. The rights to the coupon accumulated by the seller 
are referred to as accrued interes t. The clean price of a bond excludes accrued interest 
whereas the dirty price includes it.  
Concept  
 Clean price - the price of a bond ignoring any interest which 
may have accrued since the last coupon payment.  
 
Concept  Dirty price - the price of a bond, including any accrued 
interest.   62 Quoted prices are usually clean prices  whereas the price to be paid is the dirty price . 
Example  
 Assume it is 22 November 2010.Treasury 10% 2012 matures 
on 21 November 2012. Calculate the fair price of this bond 
when the re demption yield is 10% p.a. and 5% p.a.  
Assume it is 22 November 2010.Treasury 5% 2012 matures 
on 21 November 2012. Calculate the fair price of this bond 
when the redemption yield is 10% p.a. and 5% p.a.  
Assume it is 22 November 2010. A zero -coupon bond 
matures on 21 November 2012. Calculate the fair price of this 
bond when the redemption yield is 10% p.a. and 5% p.a.  
Treasury 10% pays 10 Euro per year, i.e. 5 Euro every six 
months.  
5/(1,05) + 5/(1.05)2 + 5/(1.05)3+ 105/(1,05)4 = 4,76 + 4,54 + 
4.32 + 86,38 =  100 Euro  
 (Note that 105/(1,.05)4 is the same as 5/(1,05)4 + 100/(1,05)4 
) 
5/(1,025) + 5/(1,025)2 + 5/(1,025)3 + 105/(1,025)4 = 4,88 + 
4,76 + 4,64 + +95,12 = 109,40 Euro  
Treasury 5% pays 5 Euro per year, i.e. 2.50 Euro every six 
months.  
2,5/(1,05) + 2,5/( 1,05)2 + 2,5/(1,05)3 + 102,5/(1,05)4 = 2,38 + 
2,27 + 2,16 + 84,33 = 91,14 Euro  
2,5/(1,025) + 2,5/(1,025)2 + 2,5/(1,025)3 + 102,5/(1,.025)4 = 
2,44 + 2,38 + 2,32 + 92,86 =100 Euro  
A zero coupon bond pays no coupons. The only cash flow 
receipt is the 100 Euro  at redemption.  
100/(1,1)2 = 82,64 or 100/(1,05)4 = 82,27 Euro  
100/(1,05)2 = 90,70 Euro   or 100/(1,025)4 = 90,60 Euro  
Bond prices are inversely related to interest rates, but the relationship is not symmetrical. 
The proportionate fall in the bond price re sulting from a rise in interest rates is less than 
the proportionate rise in the bond price caused by a fall when the percentage point change 
in interest rates is the same in the two cases.  
This can be illustrated by reference to the case of a bond with no  maturity date.  The price 
of such a bond is:  
P = C/r  
where P represents the fair price of the bond, C the coupon, and r is the interest rate 
(required  rate of return). Consider the case of a 5 Euro annual coupon and an initial 
interest rate of 10% p.a. Th e fair price of the bond would be estimated as:  
5 / 0,1 = 50 Euro  
If the interest rate falls by 2 percentage points to 8% p.a., the price of the bond is expected 
to rise to:  
5 / 0,08 = 62.50 Euro   63 If the interest rate rises by 2 percentage points to 12% p .a., the fair price of the bond falls 
to: 
5 / 0,12 = 41,67 Euro  
Whereas the interest rate fall results in a 25% price rise, the equivalent interest rate 
increase causes a 16,67% price decline. This asymmetry of price response is referred to as 
convexity.  
Future cash flows from a bond, together with the required rate of return, can be used to 
estimate the fair price of the bond. The process could be reversed in order to find the 
redemption yield of the bond know ing its current price and the future cash flows . The 
redemption yield (y) can be obtained by solving equation  for y.  
P =C/(1+y)1+C/(1+y)2+C/(1+y)3+C/(1+y)4+B/(1+y)4  
where P is the current market price of the bond, C is the annual coupon, B is the 
redemption  value of the bond, and y is the redemption yield (yield to maturity).  
The effective annual yield  takes account of the compounding. The effective annual yield 
is given by: (1+ y)2-1 . 
Realized compound yield is  the average compound rate of return actually obtained from 
an investment. Realized compoun d yield is affected by yield on reinvested coupons.  
The calculations of redemption yield assume that coupons are reinvested at the redemption 
yield. The realized compound yield equals the redemption yield if coupons are reinvested 
at the redemption yield a nd the bond is held to redemption. If the reinvestment rate for the 
coupons exceeds the redemption yield, the realized compound yield will exceed the 
redemption yield.  
If the reinvestment rate for the coupons is less than the redemption yield, the realise d 
compound yield will be less than the redemption yield. Bond duration and risk  
There are two types of risk encountered by investors in bonds. There is price (or capital) 
risk, and reinvestment (or income) risk . Price risk is the risk that bond prices can 
change. For example a general rise in interest rates, or a fall in the credit rating of a 
particular bond, would reduce the price of a bond. A capital loss would result.  
Reinvestment risk refers to the uncertainty of the interest rate at which coupons and 
redemption sums can be invested. This causes uncertainty as to the final sum that will be 
available at the end of an investment horizon.  
 
4.3.2.  Bond price volatility  
Bond price volatility is measured by duration. The duration measures include Macaulay’s 
durati on, modified duration, and money duration. Macaulay’s duration is the average 
period of time to the receipt of cash flows. Each time period (to the receipt of a cash flow) 
is weighted by the proportionate contribution of that cash flow to the fair price of  the bond. 
Macaulay’s duration is transformed into modified duration by means of dividing it by 
(1+r/n), where r is the redemption yield (which approximates an interest rate) and n is the 
number of coupon payments per year.  
Macaulay’s duration  has another meaning, it is the proportionate change in the bond 
price (fair price of the bond) arising from a unit proportional change in (1 + redemption 
yield).  
Macaulay’s duration = ( ΔP/P) / ( Δ(1+r)/(1+r))   64 Where Δ is the change in, and P is the bond price.)  
The corresponding interpretation of modified duration  is: 
Modified duration = (ΔP/P) / Δ r  
Δ (1+r) = Δ r. 
Equations assume annual coupon payments. When coupons are paid more frequ ently, r is 
replaced by r/n (the annual redemption yield divided by the number of coupon payments 
per year).  
The calculation of duration can be demonstrated by an example. Suppose that a bond has 
just paid a coupon, matures in two years, and pays a coupon  of 6 Euro six -monthly. The 
interest rate is 10% p.a. for all maturities. The fair price of the bond is:  
P = 6/(1,05)+6/(1,05)2+6/(1,05)3+106/(1,05)4 = 5,71 + 5,44 + 5,18 + 87,21 = 103,54  
An interest rate of 10% p .a. is 5% per six -month period.  
Macaulay’s  duration is calculated as the weighted average of the periods to the receipt of 
cash flows. The weighting is based on the contribution of the period’s cash flow to the fair 
price of the bond. The periods are 0,5, 1, 1,5, and 2 years.  
Macaulay’s duration= (5,71/103,54)0,5+(5,44/103,54)1,0+(5,18/103,54)1,5 +(87,21/103,54)2,0 
=0,028 + 0,053 + 0,075 + 1,685 = 1,841 years.  
Conversion of Macaulay’s duration to modified duration is made through division by 
(1+r/n).  
Modified duration =1,841/(1 +0,1/2) =1,841/(1,. 05) =1,753  
Example  
 A corporate bond pays an annual coupon of £10 and has four 
years to maturity. It has just paid a coupon.  As a result of a 
downgrading of its credit rating, its required rate of return 
rises from 8% p.a. to 12% p.a. What are the effects  of this 
change on (a) the price, and (b) the Macaulay’s duration, of 
the bond? (c) Discuss your results.  
 
Example  
 Treasury 10% 2012, which pays coupons six -monthly, will 
reach maturity on 10 June 2012. It is now 11 June 2010. 
Interest rates for 0,5, 1, 1,5, and 2 years are all 7% p.a. 
Estimate the fair price, Macaulay’s duration, and modified 
duration of the bond.  
 
Example  
 An investo r has two bonds. Bond A pays a 5 Euro  annual 
coupon and matures in five years. Bond B pays a 4 Euro  
coupon semi -annually and matures in three years. The 
investor needs to sell one bond immediately and hold the 
other for two years. The current rate of interest, for all 
maturities up to five years, is 6% p.a.  
Which bond would the investor sell if that investor expected 
interes t rates to: (a) increase, (b) decrease?  
  65 4.3.3.  Behavior of Macaulay’s duration  
Macaulay’s duration of a bond behavior can be summarized by a set of rules.  
Rule 1: The duration of a zero coupon bond equals its time to maturity. Since a zero 
coupon bond generates  only one cash flow, the payment of principal at maturity, the 
average time to the receipt of cash flows equals the time to that payment.  
Rule 2: Holding time to maturity and redemption yield constant, duration is inversely 
related to the coupon.  
Rule 3: Holding the coupon rate constant, duration generally increases with time to 
maturity.  
Rule 4: Holding coupon and maturity constant, duration is inversely related to redemption 
yield.  
Rule 5: The duration of an irredeemable bond is given by (1 + r)/r, where r is the 
redemption yield. If a bond pays the same coupon each period forever without the 
principal ever being repaid, the duration equals (1 +  r)/r.  
Example  
 A fund manager holds a 100 -million Euro bond portfolio 
comprising three bonds: A, B, and C. Bo nd A has duration of 
four years and accounts for 25 Euro million of the portfolio. 
Bond B has a duration of seven years and accounts for 25 
Euro million. Bond C, of which 50 Euro  million is held, has 
duration of ten years. What is duration of the portfolio ? 
 
4.3.4.  Immunization  
Bonds are used in institutional investment portfolios not only as means of accumulating 
wealth but also as means of funding annuity payments. Since it is possible to obtain 
reasonably reliable estimates of the duration of prospective annui ty payment streams as 
well as the duration of bond portfolios, it is possible to match the duration of the bond 
portfolio with the duration of the annuity payments. Such duration matching, or 
immunisation, is very useful for annuity and pension providers s ince it provides a high 
degree of protection against interest rate risk.  
Duration is also important for the structuring of bond index tracker funds. If such a fund 
were to be constructed using stratified sampling based on a cell structure, one of the 
chara cteristics of a cell would be duration. Other characteristics might be redemption yield  
and credit rating.  
There would be a cell for each combination of characteristics (e.g. high duration, low 
redemption yield , high credit rating), and the portfolio would  contain an appropriately 
weighted combination of cells. If an annuity fund, index tracker fund, or other bond fund 
exhibits a duration that differs from the optimum it is possible to use bond futures to adjust 
the portfolio duration to the desired value.  
 
4.3.5.  Bond convexity  
Duration provides just an approximation to the relationship between yield changes and 
bond price movements. The analysis of the price/yield relationship for a bond together 
with a straight line representing duration (i.e. price value of a b asis point, PVBP), shows 
that for small changes in yield it is sufficient.  
  66 Concept  
 Convexity  is a measure of the change in duration with 
respect to changes in interest rates.  
However, the actual price change is expressed by the curved price/yield relat ionship. Thus 
for large yield changes, the duration line provides a poor estimate of the actual price 
change. Duration underestimates price rises and overestimates falls. In both cases the new 
bond price is underestimated. The inaccuracies arise because mo ney duration fails to take 
account of the convexity (curvature) of the actual price/yield relationship of a bond.  
While constructing bond portfolios a bond portfolio manager should be concerned with not 
only duration, but also convexity. Convexity has valu e in that it leads to higher bond prices 
following interest rate movements, when compared with an investment with zero 
convexity. High convexity bonds provide this benefit to a greater extent than low 
convexity bonds. The benefits of convexity are greater when interest rate changes are 
relatively large. This implies that the portfolio manager needs to consider the prospective 
size of interest rate movement as well as the direction.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Duration and convexity  
If instead of duration a Taylor expansion is used, expressing the percentage change in 
bond price in terms of the first, second and higher derivatives, the approximation is more 
accurate. The second derivative incorporates what has been called convexity:  
Convexity = ( d2P / dy2) x ( 1/P ) x (1 / 2 ) to y2,  
Figure 10 shows, that for increases of interest rates to y 2 the duration plus convexity 
approximation  gives a high estimate of bond price. For decreases in interest rates to y 3 , the 
duration and convexity approximation  give a low estimate of bond price.  
 
Example  
 A bond has just paid a six -monthly coupon of 4 Euro. There 
are four more coupons to be paid by maturity. How accurate 
is modified duration for the purpose of estimating the e ffect y3 y2 y1 
Initial 
interest 
rate  First & second 
derivatives  
First derivative  
Interest rate  Price
e
Price   67 of a (a) 0.2% p.a., and (b) 1% p.a., decrease in the redemption 
yield on the bond price, when redemption yields are initially 
2% p.a. Comment on the results of the calculations.  
A bond with high convexity will tend to have a relatively low redemptio n yield . The 
advantage from high convexity would be offset by a lower yield. If interest rate 
movements are small, the gains from convexity would not compensate for the low yield. 
So if a portfolio manager expects a small interest rate change, bonds with l ow convexity 
should be chosen. If the expectation is that there will be a substantial interest rate 
movement, high convexity bonds should be chosen.  
Convexity is greatest for low coupon, long maturity, and low -redemption -yield bonds (i.e. 
high duration bon ds).Convexity can be calculated and combined with measures of duration 
when evaluating the potential effects of interest rate changes on bond prices. Since 
measures of duration are accurate only for very small changes in interest rates, a convexity 
correct ion is required in the case of large interest rate movements. To estimate the effects 
of relatively large interest rate changes on bond prices, it is necessary to combine an 
estimate of convexity with an estimate of duration.  
4.4. Bond analysis  
4.4.1.  Inverse floaters  and floating rate notes  
Financial engineering can create derivatives from a non -derivative investment , e.g.  the 
division of a conventional bond into an inverse floater and a floating rate note.  
Inverse floater  is a bond whose interest rate is inversely r elated to a market rate. For 
example an inverse floater might pay a coupon rate of 10% p.a. minus LIBOR (LIBOR is a 
commonly used benchmark interest rate that reflects market rates).  
The price of an inverse floater is extremely sensitive to interest rate m ovements. Not only 
does the coupon rate fall when interest rates rise, but the rate at which the coupons and 
principal value are discounted also rises. There are two effects of interest rate rises that act 
to reduce the bond price. Conversely interest rate  falls have two positive effects on the 
bond price; the higher coupons are accompanied by a lower discount rate. So inverse 
floaters are very sensitive to interest rate changes, in other words they have very long 
durations.  Inverse floaters are structured by dividing a conventional bond into an inverse 
floater and a floating rate note.  
Floating rate note  is a bond whose coupon rate moves in line with market rates. For 
example the coupon rate on a floating rate note might be 2% p.a. plus EURIB OR. Since 
the coupon rate moves in the same direction as the rate of discount, effects of interest rate 
changes tend to offset each other with the effect that there is little net effect on the bond 
price. Floating rate notes exhibit low price volatility and hence short durations.  
The high duration of inverse floaters renders them useful for hedging long -term liabilities.  
Falling interest rates increase the value of the liabilities, but that would be offset by the 
increase in the value of the inverse floaters. Inverse fl oaters might be attractive to 
institutions with long -term liabilities such as pension funds, annuity providers, and life 
assurance companies. Conversely floating rate notes could be attractive to institutions with 
short -term liabilities, such as banks and building societies.  
 
4.4.2.  Callable bonds  
Some corporate bonds are callable . This means that the issuer has the right to repurchase 
the bonds at a predetermined price (the issuer has a call option on the bonds). To  68 compensate for the risk of future calls, the bo ndholders require a higher coupon (on a 
callable as opposed to noncallable bond), a call premium, and typically a period of call 
protection during which the original coupon is locked in (see Figure 11). 
A rise in the bond price that makes the repurchase desirable would be brought about by a 
fall in market interest rates or an improvement in the credit rating of the bonds. Under 
these circumstances the issuer could repurchase the bonds and issue new bonds at a lower 
coupon rate. The iss uer would choose to repurchase since that would allow for a reduction 
in financing costs. Bonds with a relatively high coupon could be repurchased with money 
raised from the sale of bonds with a lower coupon. The issuer thereby reduces coupon 
payments.  
The predetermined price at which the issuer has the right to repurchase puts an upper limit 
on the value of the bonds. No one would pay a higher price knowing that that they could 
be forced to sell at the predetermined price. The price/yield relationship for  a callable bond 
has an upper limit to the price . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Callable bond  
 
An implication of the u pper limit to the price is that  the convexity turns into concavity. 
Another implication is that the coupon rate on a ca llable bond will be higher than the 
coupon rate on a bond without the call feature. If investors face a ceiling on their 
prospective capital gains, they would require an enhanced coupon yield in compensation. 
Effectively investors are providing the issuer with a call option. The investors would 
require payment for the call option. The payment to the investors takes the form of 
increased coupons.  
Figure 12clarifies the relationship between the values of the call option, the noncallable 
bond and the callable bond. On the horizontal axis the figure shows the value of a 
noncallable bond. As interest rates get lower, the value of the noncallable bond increases.  
The left vertical axis shows the value of a call option for a callable bond with the same 
coupon, par value, and maturity as the noncallable bond. The origin for the left axis is the 
point where the thick black lines cross. As interest rates go down, the market value of a 
noncallable bond increases, and the value of the call option als o increases.  
 Par 
Issue 
date Maturity  Noncallab le 
but 
redeemable  Freely callable  
Time  Call price   69  
 
Figure 12. Values of callable bonds, noncallable bonds, and the call option  
 
The right vertical axis shows the price of noncallable and callable bonds with the same 
coupons, maturity, and call price. The origin of the right axis is the right corner of the 
figure. The value of the callable bond is equal to the value of the non callable bond minus 
the call option value. As the interest rates fall, the value of the callable bond approaches 
the call price.  
 
4.4.3.  Converti ble bonds  
Some corporate bonds may be convertible into common stock of the company at the option 
of the bond holder. The bonds are usually callable at par plus a call premium. A 
convertible bond is in the money if the stock value of the bond exceeds the call price. The 
call feature is included to allow the company to force conversion into common stock.  
Conversion can be forced only if the bond is in the money. Call of an out -of-the money 
convertible induces the bondholders to turn in their bonds at the call p rice. Sometimes 
voluntary conversion occurs if the convertible is in -the-money and the dividend yield on 
the stock exceeds the current yield on the convertible.  Call option  
Origin for left 
axis 0 EV EV 
EV 
EV Intrinsic 
value  Noncallable bond  Bond price  
Option 
value  EV = Excess value  
Call 
price  
Par 
Origin for 
right axis  Value of 
noncallable  Par      Call  
bbbbb price  Callable 
bond  
Lower interest rates  0  70 Figure 13shows the relationship between the stock value, the straight bon d value and the 
price of the convertible. The stock value is initially below the par value and the stock value 
is assumed to grow over time. The straight bond value gradually approaches  the par value 
as the bond gets closer to maturity. The call price dec lines over time to the par value. As 
the stock value rises above the call price, the premium of the convertible over the bond 
value declines and the market price of the convertible approaches the stock value.  
The market price of the convertible must be hig her than the higher of the straight bond 
value or the stock value. Otherwise arbitrage occurs.  
When convertible bonds are issued, the stock price tends to decline. This evidence is 
consistent with the view, that issuing convertibles is a negative signal t o the market. The 
evidence supports the view that convertibles are issued when the management has negative 
information.  
 
Figure 13. Convertible bonds  
 
4.5. Summary  
Bonds are debts of the governments, companies, and organizations that i ssue them. One of 
the ways in which bonds differ from shares is in the relative certainty of future cash flows. 
In the absence of default by the issuer, the future cash flows from a bond are typically 
known with certainty. This is in contrast to shares sin ce shares typically have dividend 
payments, which are variable and uncertain. The relative certainty of bond cash flows 
influences the pricing and analysis of bonds. The fair price of a bond is estimated using a 
discount model. The relative certainty of bo nd cash flows means that other characteristics, 
such as duration and convexity, can also be reliably estimated.  Other important bond 
characteristics  are future bond yields and of bond price volatility (risk).  
The debt markets are used by both firms and gov ernments to raise funds for long -term 
purposes, though most investment by firms is financed by retained profits. Firms and Stock value  
Convertible 
bbbprice  
Call price  
Straight bond value  
Maturity time  Issue date  Par $  71 governments can issue corporate bonds of various types of shares. Bonds usually pay a 
fixed rate of interest at pre -determined interv als. Bonds are traded on a stock exchange and 
their price fluctuates in response to supply and demand. In the short run the supply of both 
is fixed and price fluctuations are therefore the result of changes in demand.  
 
Key terms  
 Callable bond  
 Convertible bond  
 Redemption yield  
 Duration  
 Convexity  
 
Further readings  
1. Dunne P., Moore M., Portes R. (2006). European Government Bond Markets: 
Transparency, Liquidity, Efficiency, CEPR, London.  
2. Edwards A. K., Harris L. E., Piwowar M. S. (2007). Corporate Bond Market 
Transaction Costs and Transparency, Journal of Finance, No. 62(3), p. 1421 –
1454.  
3. Goldstein M. A., Hotchkiss E., Sirri E. (2007). Transparency and Liquidity: A 
Controlled Experiment on Corporate Bonds, Review of Financial Studies, No. 
20(2), p. 235 –273. 
4. Pagano M. , Von Thadden E. (2008). The European Bond Markets under EMU, 
in X. Freixas, P. Hartmann, and C. Mayer (eds.), Handbook of European 
Financial Markets and Institutions, Oxford University Press, Oxford, p. 488 –
518. 
5. Wolswijk G., de Haan J. (2005). Gover nment Debt Management in the Euro 
Area: Recent Theoretical Developments and Changes in Practices, ECB 
Occasional Paper No. 25.  
 
Review questions and problems  
 
1. Why does the calculation of a ‘present value’ of a bond involve discounting?  
 Which of the followi ng would be likely to show the greatest short -run price 
volatility: a short -term bond, a long -term bond? Explain.  
 When m arket interest rates are 10 per cent, what relationship would you expect 
between the price and  redemption yields of two 8 per cent bonds, one maturing 
in three years, the other maturing in ten years?  
 Give two reasons why institutions like banks prefer to hold short -term rather 
than long -term bonds.  
 Explain the terms: dirty price, clean price, interest yield, redemption yield.  
 Are high yield  bonds good investments? Why or why not?   72  Assume a redemption yield of 8%. Compute the duration for the following 
bonds each 100 Euro par value. For the 12% coupon bond compute duration.  
a) 10 years, zero coupon;  
b) 10 years, 8 percent;  
c) 10 years, 12 perc ent coupon.  
 In problem 7 assume that yields change from 8 to 9 %. Work out the exact 
change in price and compare it with the change in price predicted by duration. 
Explain the difference. Assume 100 Euro par value.  
 Compute the duration of a portfolio compo sed of equal proportions of a ten 
year, zero coupon bond and a ten year 8 % coupon bond, assuming 89% yields 
to maturity.  
 A firm has decided immediately to refund existing callable bond issue. Under 
what circumstances is there an immediate benefit to refun ding? What does that 
benefit depend upon?  
 How can callable bonds be substitutes for short -term bonds?  
 A firm has a perpetual callable bond outstanding with a par value of 100 Euro 
and an annual coupon of 14 Euro. The firm can refund this with a new 
noncall able perpetual bond having an 8 percent coupon. The call price on the 
old bond issue is 114 Euro. Flotation costs for a new issue are 2 percent of par 
value. What is the myopic benefit of refunding?  
 
  73 5. EQUITY  MARKET  
 
Mini contents   Equity instruments  
 The pu rpose and functions of stock exchanges.  
 The distinction between primary and secondary markets.  
 Types of stock exchange.  
 Stock market trading systems.  
 Bid-offer spreads.  
 Types of purchase and sale order.  
 Processes by which shares are issued.  
 
Equity market  is one of the key sectors of financial markets where long -term financial 
instruments are traded. The purpose of equity instruments issued by corporations is to raise 
funds for the firms. The provider of the funds is granted a residual claim on the company ’s 
income, and becomes one of the owners of the firm.  
For market participants equity securities mean holding wealth as well as a source of new 
finance, and are of great significance for savings and investment process in a market 
economy.  
The purpose of eq uity is the following:  
 A new issue of equity shares is an important source of external corporate financing;  
 Equity shares perform a financing role from internally generated funds (retained 
earnings);  
 Equity shares perform an institutional role as a means o f ownership.  
Within the savings -investment process magnitude of retained earnings exceeds that of the 
news stock issues and constitutes the main source of funds for the firms. Equity 
instruments can be traded publicly and privately.  
External financing thro ugh equity instruments is determined by the following financial 
factors:  
 The degree of availability of internal financing within total financing needs of the 
firm;  
 The cost of available alternative financing sources;  
 Current market price of the firm’s equi ty shares, which determines the return of 
equity investments.  
Internal equity financing of companies is provided through retained earnings. When 
internally generated financing is scarce due to low levels of profitability and retained 
earnings, and also due  to low depreciation, but the need for long -term investments is high, 
companies turn to look for external financing sources. Firms may raise funds by issuing 
equity that grants the investor a residual claim on the company’s income.  
Low interest rates prov ide incentives for use of debt instruments, thus lowering demand 
for new equity issues. High equity issuance costs force companies to look for other sources  74 of financing as well. However, during the period of stock market growth high market 
prices of equit y shares encourage companies to issue new equity, providing with the 
possibility to attract larger magnitude of funds from the market players.  
Check Question  What is the purpose of equity?  
 
Equity markets  are markets which organize trading nationally an d internationally in such 
instruments, as common equity, preferred shares, as well as derivatives on equity 
instruments.  
Concept  Bourse  – a French term often used to refer to stock market.  
 
 
5.1. Equity instruments  
5.1.1.  Common shares  
Common (ordinary) shares  repre sent partial ownership of the company and provide their 
holders claims to future streams of income, paid out of company profits and commonly 
referred to as dividends.  Common shareholders are residual claimants, i.e. they are 
entitled to a share only in th ose profits which remain after bondholders and preference 
shareholders have been paid. If the company is liquidated, shareholders have a claim on 
any remaining assets only after prior claimants have been paid. Therefore common 
shareholders face larger risk s than other stakeholders of the company (e.g. bondholders 
and owners of preferred shares. On the other hand, if the value of the company increases, 
the shareholders are entitled to larger potential benefits, which may well exceed the 
guaranteed interest o f bondholders.  
Concept  
 Common or ordinary share (stock) – an equity share that 
does not have a fixed dividend yield.  
The variability of returns to shareholders  is affected by the proportion of debt to equity 
financing (called the debt to equity ratio) o f the company. The higher the proportion of 
debt financing, the larger the fixed interest payments and the lower is the number of shares 
over which the net profit is to be distributed. When earned profits exceed the level 
necessary to pay the interest, all  the excess profit accrues to the smaller number of 
shareholders. On the other hand, if profits decrease below interest payments, the whole 
reduction in payments is borne by the company shareholders. The higher is the debt to 
equity ratio, the greater is t he variability in dividend payments to shareholders.  Thus 
common shares in ‘highly leveraged’ companies are usually regarded as riskier than those 
in ‘low leveraged’ companies.  
Concept  Leverage:  The amount of debt, relative to equity, in a firm’s 
capital structure . Usually expressed as the ratio of debt to 
equity, D/E, or debt to total capital D/(D E). 
The law requires that the company provides the owners with specified information in the 
annual report and accounts and that the firm must hold an annual general m eeting at which 
management conduct is subject to approval by common (ordinary) shareholders, each of 
whom has a number of votes matching the size of his shareholding.  
The decision to issue equity  against debt is based on several factors:   75  Tax incentives.  In many countries interest payments are tax deductible, however 
dividends are taxed. Thus the tax shield of debt forms incentives to finance 
company by debt.  
 Cost of distress.  Increase of company leverage, increases the risk of financial 
insolvency and may cause distress as well as lead to bankruptcy. Thus companies 
tend to minimise their credit risk and increase the portion of equity in the capital 
structure.  
 Agency conflicts.  When a company is financed by debt, an inherent conflict arises 
between debt hold ers and equity holders. Shareholders have incentives to 
undertake a riskier operating and investment decisions, hoping for higher profits in 
case of optimistic outcomes. Their incentives are mainly based by limited liability 
of their investments. In case o f worst outcome debt holders may suffer more, in 
spite of their priority claims towards company assets.  
 Signalling effect.  The companies, which issue equity to finance operations, 
provide signals to the market, that current share selling price is high and company 
is overvalued.  
Check Question  
 Why does financial distress increase agency conflicts 
between equity holders and debt holders?  
 
5.1.2.  Preferred shares  
Preferred shares  is a financial instrument, which represents an equity interest in a firm 
and which usually does not allow for voting rights of its owners. Typically the investor 
into it is only entitled to receive a fixed contractual amount of dividends and this make this 
instrument similar to debt. However, it is similar to an equity instrument because  the 
payment is only made after payments to the investors in the firm’s debt instruments are 
satisfied. Therefore it is call a hybrid instrument.  
Technically preferred shareholders share ownership of the firm with common shareholders 
and are compensated wh en company generates earnings. Therefore, if the company does 
not earn sufficient net profit, from which to pay the preferred share dividends it may not 
pay dividends without the risk of bankruptcy.  Because preferred stockholders typically are 
entitled to  a fixed contractual amount, preferred stock is referred to as a fixed income 
instrument .  
Concept  
 Preferred share – an equity security, which carries a 
predetermined constant dividend payment.  
Preferred stock investments may have tax advantage  to instit utional investors.  
Majority of preferred shares have cumulative dividend provision , which entitles to 
preferred share dividend payments (current and from previous periods) dividend payments 
on common shares. Usually owners of preferred shares do not partic ipate in the net profit 
of the company in excess to the stated fixed annual dividend.  
Due to the fact that preferred dividends can be omitted, the company risk is less compared 
to risk in case of company debt. However in this case, company may find it dif ficult to 
raise new capital before all preferred dividends are paid. Investors may be unwilling to 
make new investments before the company is able to compensate its existing equity 
investors.   76 Preferred stock is an attractive source of financing for highly leveraged companies. Equity 
markets offer a variety of innovations in preferred shares issues. These varieties include:  
 cumulative preference shares  
 non-cumulative preference shares  
 irredeemable  
 redeemable preference shares  
 convertible preference shares  
 participating preference shares  
 stepped preference shares.  
With the exception of the first two, these characteristics are not excluding each other. For 
example it is possible to issue non -cumulative, redeemable, convertible preferred shares.  
Non-cumulative p referred shares  do not have an obligation to pay any missed past 
dividends, with the effect that missed dividends may be lost forever.  
A redeemable preferred share  has a maturity date on which the original sum invested is 
repaid, whereas most preference s hares have no maturity date (the issuer may pay the 
dividends forever and never repay the principal sum). Some redeemable preference shares 
provide the issuer with the right to redeem at a predetermined price without the obligation 
to do so; in effect such  preference shares provide the issuer with a call option, which 
would be paid for by means of a higher dividend for the investors.  
Convertible preferred shares  give the holder the right to convert preference shares into 
ordinary shares at a predetermined rate; the investor pays nothing to convert apart from 
surrendering the convertible preference shares. In some cases the right to convert arises 
only in the event of a failure to pay dividends.  
Participating preferred shares  allow the issuing company to in crease the dividends if 
profits are particularly high; the preference share dividend can exceed the fixed level if the 
dividend on ordinary shares is greater than a specified amount.  
Stepped preferred shares  pay a dividend that increases in a predetermine d way.  
Specific  adjustable rate preferred shares  are attractive in increasing interest 
environment. If the dividend is reset each quarter according to a pre -established formula 
based on Treasury bill rate, these issues can be considered as company capital .  
Auction rate preferred shares (ARPS)  or Single point adjustable  rate shares (ARPS)  
reset dividend periodically using Dutch auction method. The reset date can be as frequent 
as 49 days. Because of characteristics close to money market securities, they ha ve 
significantly lower yields.  
Concept  Dutch auction  - a method, which allows all investors 
participating in the auction submitting a bid for the stock by 
specified deadline. The bid prices are ranked and minimum 
price for selling of shares is determined. All bids equal or 
above minimum price are accepted, and all bids bellow the 
minimum price are rejected.  
 
Preferred equity redemption cumulative stocks (PERCS)  are shares that pay dividends 
and are automatically converted into common stock at a conversion price and date. These  77 can be callable at any date after the issuance for price above the issue price (e.g. by 40%) 
and gradually declines as the conversion date approaches.  
The cost of preferred equity financing  may be higher, compared to debt financing. 
Preferred dividend is not a tax deductible expense to the company. Besides, investors are 
compensated more, as they assume its risk is higher due to the fact, that the company 
legally is not required to pay preferred dividends. As a rule, preferred equity h as no 
maturity, thus it may force company to permanent preferred dividend payments.       
Check Question  
 Why does financial distress increase agency conflicts 
between equity holders and debt holders?  
 
5.1.3.  Private equity  
When companies are organized as part nerships and private limited companies, their shares 
are not traded publicly. The form of equity investments, which is made through private 
placements, is called private equity . 
In such case investors’ liability may not be limited to the amount of contribu ted capital, 
and may be extended to total wealth of private owners. It is used mainly by small and 
medium -sized companies, young or start -up business in need to raise significant funds for 
investment. However, their access to bank or public stock market fi nancing is limited. 
Typically banks do not finance start -ups due to significant risks of their operations, and a 
limited company equity base. On the other hand, a public offering of shares for such 
companies may be feasible only if it has a significant sha reholder base to support an active 
secondary market. Without an active secondary market such shares are illiquid, founders 
of the companies find it difficult to “cash out” by selling their original equity investment, 
can be forced to sell shares at a disco unt to the fundamental company value, fixed costs of 
being public company are high, and this prohibits company from being public. Therefore 
such companies attempt to raise additional capital from wealthy individual or institutional 
investors. This type of investments has grown significantly since late 1990s, mainly in US 
and is slowly gaining ground in European countries.  
The most important sources of private equity investments come from venture capital 
funds , private equity funds and in the form of levera ged buyouts .  
Venture capital funds  receive capital from wealthy individual or institutional investors, 
willing to maintain the investment for a long -term period (5 -10 years). Venture capital 
market brings together private businesses that need equity finan cing and venture capitalists 
(business angels) that can provide funding. Venture capital fund identifies potential of the 
business, negotiates the terms of investment, return from the investments, exit strategy. 
The invested funds are not withdrawn before a set deadline. Common exit strategies are 
either through the public sale of the equity stake in public stock offering, or through cash 
out if the company is acquired by another firm.  
Private equity funds  pool resources of their partners to fund most ofte n new business 
start-ups. They can rely heavily on debt financing, also. Thus, they perform the role of 
financial intermediaries. Private equity funds usually take over the businesses, manage 
them and control the restructuring, charge annual fee for managi ng the fund. Exit 
strategies are similar to the ones used by venture capital funds.  
Leveraged buyouts  are company equity purchases by individual or institutional investors, 
which are financed by a minor portion of share capital and a major portion of debt,  
provided by banks or other financial intermediaries.   78 Check Question  Why does financial distress increase agency conflicts 
between equity holders and debt holders?  
 
5.1.4.  Global shares and American Depository Receipts (ADR)  
Investors may invest into foreign s hares by purchasing shares directly, purchasing 
American Depository Receipts (ADRs), Global Depository Receipts (GDRs). 
Alternatively, investments can be made by investing into international funds or purchasing 
exchange traded funds (ETFs).  
Direct purchase s of foreign shares can be limited due to limited access to the stock 
exchanged, a limited available set of shares, high transaction costs through specialized 
brokerage companies.  
Shares in international funds (International mutual funds (IMFs))  offer pos sibility of 
investing into a portfolio of international securities, created and managed  by various 
financial institutions. Thus individual investors may get access and diversify across 
international stocks. IMFs can be specializing on specific country or a cross several 
countries or regions.  
Exchange traded funds (ETFs)  are passive funds, that track specific index . Thus investor 
can invest into a specific index, representing a country’s (e.g. foreign) stock market.  
Although ETFs are denominated in US dollar s as a rule, the net asset value of an 
international ETF is determined by translating foreign currency value of the foreign 
securities into dollars.  
While the price of each international ETF is denominated in US dollars, the underlying 
securities that mak e up the index are denominated in non -US currencies. Thus the return 
on ETF will be influenced by the movement of the country’s currency against dollar. If the 
country’s currency appreciates, this will increase the value of the index as measured in 
dollars . On the other hand, if the foreign currency depreciates, this will reduce the value of 
the index as measured in dollars. This is also true for IMFs.  
Check Question  
 What are advantages and disadvantages for investing into 
exchange traded funds (ETFs) and  international investment 
funds?  
American Depository Receipts (ADR)  is an arrangement under which foreign shares are 
deposited within a US bank, which in turn issues ADRs in the name of foreign company. 
In this way the shares of a foreign company is admi tted to the well developed stock 
market, like US or UK. When issued in US, they are denominated in US dollars. 
Dividends are also paid in US dollars, even if the underlying security’s cash flows are 
denominated in terms of foreign issuer’s home currency.  
ADR may represent a combination of several foreign shares (e.g. lots of 100 shares). 
Trading takes place in negotiable certificates representing ownership of shares of the 
company.  
Concept  
 American Depository Receipts (ADR)  – a certificate of 
ownership iss ued by a US bank to promote local trading on a 
foreign stock. US bank holds foreign shares and issues ADRs 
against them.  
An ADR program, which is created without company’s involvement, is called an 
unsponsored ADR .  79 If ADR program is created with an assist ance of the company, it is called a sponsored 
ADR . 
Such shares can be registered within the securities exchange commission and comply with 
reporting requirements, and thus be traded on an organized stock exchange. Without such 
registration and reporting co mpliance, they can be traded on the over -the counter market.  
 
Table 5. Comparison of equity instruments  
Instrument  Types  Characteristics  Investors  Market  
Common 
shares  Common 
(ordinary) shares,  
Puttable common 
shares,  
ADRs  
GDRs  Corporate 
ownership  
 
 Companies,  
state,  
financial 
institutions,  
non-financial 
intermediaries,  
individual 
investors  Stock 
exchange  
Preferred 
shares  cumulative 
preference shares,  
non-cumulative 
preference shares,  
redeemable 
preference shares,  
convertible 
preference shares,  
participating 
preference shares,  
stepped preference 
shares.  
 Hybrid security , 
Features of 
equity  and debt , 
Callability  Financial 
institutions,  
non-financial 
intermediaries, 
individual 
investors  Preferred stock 
market /  
stock exchange  
Private 
equity  Venture capital 
fund shares  
Private equity fund 
shares  
 Private 
placements,  
investments of 
pool of funds,  
Partnerships or  
private limited 
form of 
companies  Venture capital 
companies,  
institutional 
investors,  
individual 
investors 
(busines s angels)  Private equity 
market  
 
 
 
Advantages  of ADRs include  
 easy and direct access to funding in the foreign market;   80  building company name recognition in the foreign country;  
 reliable quoting of share prices;  
 close following by investment analysts.  
Disadvantages  of ADRs:  
 A costly investment alternative;  
 For large institutional investors vs small retail investors differences in prices and 
return;  
 Market for ADRs can be illiquid;  
 Multiple listing can result in share price differences in various markets g lobally.  
Global Depository Receipts (GDRs) are negotiable receipts issued by financial institutions 
in developed countries against shares of foreign companies. GDRs can be simultaneously 
issued in US and Europe.  
Financial institution collects and distribu tes dividends paid by the foreign firm to the GDR 
(also ADR) investor. Thus financial institutions facilitate access to world equity markets 
by intermediating between world investors and companies in developing and transition 
countries.  
Check Question  
 What are advantages and disadvantages of issuing American 
Depository Receipts and Global Depository Receipts to 
issuing companies and to investors?  
 
5.2. Primary equity market  
When equity shares are initially issued, they are said to be sold in the primary mark et. 
Equity can be issued either privately (unquoted shares) or publicly via shares that are listed 
on a stock exchange (quoted shares).  
Public market  offering of new issues typically involves the use of an investment bank in a 
process, which is referred t o as the underwriting  of securities . 
Private placement market  includes securities which are sold directly to investors and are 
not registered with the securities exchange commission. There are different regulatory 
requirements for such securities.  
In the private equity market, venture capital is often provided by investors as ‘start -up’ 
money to finance new, high -risk companies in return for obtaining equity in the company.  
In general private placement market is viewed as illiquid. Such a lack of liquidity  means 
that buyers of shares may demand a premium to compensate for this unappealing feature 
of a security.  
 
5.2.1.  Primary public market  
Initial public offering  (IPO)  means issuing public equity, i.e. when a company is engaged 
in offering of shares and is includ ed in a listing on a stock exchange for the first time. It 
allows the company to raise funds from the public.  
If a company is already listed and issues additional shares, it is called seasoned equity 
offering (SEO)  or secondary public offering (SPO) . When a firm issues equity at a stock  81 exchange, it may decide to change existing unquoted shares for quoted ones. In this case 
the proceeds from sale of shares are received by initial investors. However, when a 
company issues newly created shares, the raised fun ds are received by the company.  
Process of going public . The issuing company has to develop a prospectus with detailed 
information about the company operations, investments, financing, financial statements 
and notes, discussion on the risks involved. This  information is provided to potential 
investors for making decision in buying large blocks of shares. The prospectus is 
registered within and approved by the securities exchange commission. Afterwards the 
prospectus is sent to institutional investors, meet ings and road shows are organized in 
order to present the company.  
Concept  
 Road show  – travelling of company managers through 
various cities and making presentations for large institutional 
investors.  
Share issues are often underwritten by banks. A bank , which is underwriting a share issue 
agrees, for a fee, to buy any shares not acquired by investors. This guarantees that the 
issuing company receives the funding that it expects. In the case of rights issues, firms 
sometimes avoid paying a fee to underwr iters by using the deep discount route. In a rights 
issue, failure to sell the new shares would result from the share price (prior to the issue) 
falling below the sale price of the new shares.  
Concept  
 To underwrite – an act of guaranteeing a specific pric e to 
the issuer of the security.  
Lead underwriter  – key investment bank withinn a group of 
investment banking firms that are required to underwrite a 
portion of a corporation’s newly issued shares.  
The deep discount method prices the new shares at such a low level that the market price is 
extremely unlikely to fall so far.  
The share offer price is determined by the lead underwriter, which takes into account the 
prevailing market and industry conditions. During the road show the lead underwriter is 
engaged in bookbuilding , i.e. a process of collecting indications of demanded number of 
shares by investors at various possible offer prices.  
IPO factors.  Public equity markets play a limited role as a source of new funds for listed 
corporations. Because of infor mation asymmetry, companies prefer internal financing (i.e., 
retained earnings) to external financing. Myers and Majluf (1984) have introduced the 
pecking -order theory, which states that companies adopt a hierarchy of financial 
preferences. If external fin ancing is needed, firstly, companies prefer debt funding. Equity 
is issued only as a last resort. Statistics on company sources of financing support this view. 
On the other hand, during equity markets growth and share price increase periods IPO 
market tend  to increase dramatically, while the drop in share prices is followed by 
decrease in net issuance of public equity. A large number of the issues in the late 1990s 
were ‘new economy’ offerings, like the technology, media, and telecommunications 
sector.  
Exercise  
 
 A one for four rights issue assumes offering one new share 
for every four held. A one for four rights issue may be at 160 
Euro when the current share price is 200 Euro. The cost of:  
4 shares each 200 Euro equal to  800 Euro  
1 right each 160 Euro eq uals to  160 Euro  
Thus, 5 shares cost 960 Euro (192 Euro each).   82 It is to be expected that the rights issue would cause the share 
price to fall by  
200 Euro – 192 Euro = 8 Euro.  
Among other factors the economic cycle is considered to play a significant role  in a 
company’s decision to issue public equity. Equity is often used to finance long -term 
investments, which fluctuate over the business cycle. Shiller (2003) has  related the timing 
of equity issuance with investor sentiment. Developments in investor opti mism over time 
may have an impact on the cost of equity, thus influencing the amount of equity issued. 
E.g., excessive increases in risk aversion resulting in falling stock market prices could 
raise the cost of equity, preventing companies from new equity issues. Companies also 
issue equity in order to finance the acquisition of other companies, either by using the cash 
proceeds of public offerings or by issuing shares, which are subsequently exchanged for 
the shares of a target company. Therefore merger an d acquisition (M&A) cycles can also 
be expected to correlate with equity issuance activity.  
There are important  advantages and disadvantages of initial public offerings (IPOs).  
Advantages of IPOs :  
 Possibility to obtain funds to finance investment.  
 The p rice of a company’s shares acts as a measure of the company’s value.  
 Increases of company financial independence (e.g. from banks) due to listing of a 
company’s shares on a stock exchange.  
 Possibility to diversify investments of current company owners by selling stakes in the 
company in a liquid market.  
 Increased recognition of the company name.  
 Improved company transparency.  
 A disciplining mechanism for managers.  
Disadvantages of IPOs :  
 High issuance costs due to underwriters’ commission, legal fees, and other charges.  
 High costs due to disclosure requirements.  
 Risk of wider dispersed ownership.  
 Separation of ownership and control which causes ‘agency problems’.  
 Divergence of managers’ and outside investors’ interests.  
 Information asymmetry problems be tween old and new shareholders.  
 Risk of new shareholders focusing on short -term results.  
 
Exercise  
 Instead of exercising the right to buy at 160 Euro, the investor 
can sell the right. The price could be around 192 Euro – 160 
Euro = 32 Euro, because the bu yer has the right to buy shares 
for 160 Euro when they are prospectively worth 192 Euro.  
A one for one rights issue may be used.  
1 share each 200 Euro equal to  200 Euro   83 1 right each 40 Euro equals to  40 Euro  
Thus, 2 shares cost 240 Euro (120 Euro each)  
Therefore, instead of exercising the right to buy at the 
discounted price an investor could sell the rights. In the one 
for one case, the rights might be sold for  
120 Euro – 40 Euro = 80 Euro  
Note that the one for four rights issue at 160 Euro would raise  
the same amount of money as the one for one rights issue at 
40 Euro (the latter involves selling four times the number of 
shares at a quarter of the price).  
IPO market has received negative publicity due to several problems:  
Spinning.  Spinning occurs, wh en investment bank allocates shares from an IPO to 
corporate executives. Bankers’ expectations are to get future contracts from the same 
company.  
Laddering.  When there is a substantial demand for an IPO, brokers encourage investors to 
place the first day b ids for the shares that are above the offer price. This helps to build the 
price upwards. Some investors are willing to participate to ensure that the brokers will 
reserve some shares of the next hot IPO for them.  
Excessive commissions . These are charged b y some brokers when the demand for an IPO 
is high. Investors are willing to pay the commissions if they can recover the costs from the 
return on the very first day, especially when the offer price of the share is set significantly 
below the market value.  
The literature contains strong evidence that IPOs on average perform poorly over a period 
of a year or more. Thus from a long term perspective many IPOs are overpriced. Since 
introduction of Sarbanes -Oxley Act in US, which aimed at improving company report ing 
processes and transparency, initially returns from IPOs in general have been lower.  
Check Question  
 Why IPO is often underpriced?  
 
Check Question  
 What are advantages and disadvantages of IPOs to issuing 
companies and investors?  
 
5.3. Secondary equity m arket  
Equity instruments are traded among investors in a secondary market , in which no new 
capital is raised and the issuer of the security does not benefit directly from the sale.  
Secondary markets are also classified into organized stock exchanges  and over-the-
counter (OTC) markets .  
Apart from legal structure, numerous historical differences are found in the operations of 
national stock markets. The most important differences are in the trading procedures.  
The trading on secondary markets takes place am ong investors, however most often 
through specialised intermediaries - stock  brokers (dealers) , who buy or sell securities for 
their clients.   84 Securities’ trading in the secondary market form the means by which stocks or bonds 
bought in the primary market c an be converted into cash. The knowledge that assets 
purchased in the primary market can easily and cheaply be resold in the secondary market 
makes investors more prepared to provide borrowers with funds by buying in the primary 
market. Effective secondary  market is an important basis of successful primary market.  
If transaction costs are high in the secondary market the proceeds from the sale of 
securities will be reduced, and the incentive to buy in the primary market would be lower. 
Also high transaction  costs in the secondary market might tend to reduce the volume of 
trading and thereby reduce the ease with which secondary market sales can be executed. 
Therefore high transaction costs in the secondary market could reduce primary market 
asset liquidity. I n consequence there can be adverse effects on the level of activity in the 
primary market and hence on the total level of investment in the economy.  
 
5.3.1.  Organized exchanges  
Stock exchanges  are central trading locations, in which securities of corporations are  
traded. These securities may include not only equity, but also debt instruments as well as 
derivatives.  
Equity instruments can be traded if they are listed by the organized exchange, i.e. included 
in a stock exchange trading list . The list is formed of in struments that satisfy the 
requirements set by the exchange, including minimum earnings requirements, net tangible 
assets, market capitalization, and number and distribution of shares publicly held. Each 
stock exchange specifies the set of requirements.  
Advantages  of listing  on the stock exchange to the corporation and its shareholders are:  
 The ability to sell shares on the stock exchange makes people more willing to 
invest in the company.  
 Investors may accept a lower return on the shares and the company c an raise 
capital more cheaply.  
 Stock exchange provides a market price for the shares, and forms basis for 
valuation of a company.  
 The information aids corporate governance, allows monitoring the management of 
the company.  
 Listing makes takeover bids easier , since the predator company is able to buy 
shares on the stock market.  
 The increased transparency may reduce the cost of capital.  
However there are several disadvantages of listing , which include:  
 Listing on the stock exchange is costly for the company.  
 It requires a substantial amount of documentation to be prepared, e.g. audited and 
prepared according to IFRS financial statements.  
 It increases transparency, which may cause problems in terms of market 
competition and in takeover cases.  
Stock market deale rs and brokers  fulfill specific functions at the equity market. Dealers 
make market in securities, maintain securities inventories and risk their own funds. In  85 contrast to dealers, who risk their own funds, brokers do not own securities, but execute 
matchi ng of buyers and sellers for a specific fee.  
Concept  
 Dealer  – an agent who buys and sells securities as a principal 
on its own account, rather than as a broker for his clients. 
Dealer may function as a broker, or as market maker.  
Dealers stand ready to b uy at the bid price and to sell at the ask price, and making profit 
from the average spread. However, when the stock prices are going down, dealers 
experience loss of value of stock inventory. This forms the primary risk for the dealer.  
Concept  
 Broker  – an agent who executes orders to buy and sell 
securities on behalf of his clients in exchange for a 
commission fee.  
In order to profit from different price movements directions dealers make positioning .  
 If the dealer expects the stock prices to increase, it buys the stock and takes a long 
position . Profit is earned, if the stock is sold at a higher price.  
 If a dealer expects the stock price to decline, he tries to benefit from a short 
position . In a short sale the security is borrowed and sold in the expe ctation of 
buying this security back later at a lower price. The investor tries to sell high and 
buy low, profiting from the difference. Proceeds from a short sale cannot be used 
by the shortseller, and must be deposited at the broker. The shortseller must  pay 
any cash dividends to the lender of the security. This rule is related to the amount 
of drop in stock prices by approximately the after -tax amount of a cash dividend 
after the dividend payment date. Stock exchanges apply downstick restrictions on 
short sales in order to prevent from panic selling and driving stock prices sharply 
down.  
If the dealer’s forecast is wrong, the dealer must close the position at unfavorable price and 
absorb the loss. This creates the risk of dealer bankruptcy, and forces sto ck exchanges as 
well as securities exchange commissions to impose the specific regulations in order to 
prevent this type of price manipulations.  
Concept  
 Short sale  – the sale of the security, which is not owned by 
the seller at the time of trade.  
Securi ty dealers are heavily levered . Typically the dealer’s equity forms a small 
percentage of the market value of his inventory. Most dealers financing is in the form of 
debt (e.g. bank loan). Majority of dealer debt financing is in the form of repurchase 
agreements (REPO, see chapter on Money markets).  
There are several types of stock exchange members : 
 Commission brokers  – who execute buy and sell orders for the public for the fee. 
This is the largest group of market participants, acting as agents of lenders o r 
buyers of financial securities. They may find the best price for someone who 
wishes to buy or sell securities.  
 Odd -lot brokers  – a group of brokers, who execute transactions of fewer than 100 
shares. These brokers break round lots (a multiple of 100 shar es) into odd -lots and 
vise versa for a fee.  
 Registered trader  – who owns a seat on a stock exchange and trades on his own 
account. Large volume of trades, along with the possibility of speedy execution of  86 orders, allow the traders to cover their large inve stments into the seat of a stock 
exchange.  
 Specialists  – who are market makers for individual securities listed on an 
organized stock exchange. Their purpose is to reduce variability of the securities 
prices. When there are too many sell orders, the speci alists have to perfume a role 
of buyers to keep the prices from falling for a period. When there are too many buy 
orders, the specialists have to perfume a role of sellers to prevent the temporary 
rise in prices.  
 Issuing  intermediary  - who undertakes to is sue new securities on behalf of a 
borrower. An issuing house acts as an agent for the borrower in financial markets. 
This task is usually carried out by investment banks  
 Market -maker is an intermediary who holds stock of securities and quotes a price 
at wh ich each of the securities may be bought and sold. Market -making is usually 
performed by the securities  divisions of the major banks  
 Arbitrageur - who buys and sells financial assets in order to make a profit from 
pricing anomalies. Anomalies occur when th e same asset is priced differently in 
two markets at the same time. Since financial markets are well informed and highly 
competitive, usually these anomalies are very small and do not last long. 
Anomalies are usually known, thus there is no risk of arbitra ge, which makes it 
different from speculation.  
 Hedger  - who buys or sells a financial asset to avoid risk of devaluation of 
currency, change of interest rates or prices of the securities in the market.  
Concept  
 Arbitrage  – is the simultaneous purchase of a n undervalued 
asset or portfolio and sale of an overvalued but equivalent 
asset or portfolio, in order to obtain a riskless profit on the 
price differential. It takes advantage of market inefficiencies 
in a risk -free manner.  
Stock exchanges set quite high  commissions  for all member firms. The competition from 
other types of markets, e.g. OTC or third market (direct trading transactions), force stock 
exchanges to move to negotiated commission schedule, where lower fees can be applied to 
larger transactions.  
Majority of transactions at the stock exchanges are fully automated . Small buy and 
sell orders are matched by computers.  
 
5.3.2.  Over -the-counter (OTC) market  
Over -the-counter (OTC) market is the marketplace for trading financial instruments, which 
are generall y unlisted financial instruments. These markets are networks of dealers, who 
make markets in individual securities. Common equity shares that are traded on it can be 
listed and unlisted shares.  
 
Concept  
 Over -the-counter (OTC) market – a market for securi ties 
made up of dealers. It is not an organized exchange, and 
trading usually takes place by electronic means.  
Two large segments of OTC markets  can be distinguished:   87  Unorganized OTC markets  with unregulated trading taking place between 
individuals. Typic ally these markets do not restrict possibilities to buy and sell 
outside of organized exchanges.  
 Highly organized and sophisticated OTC  markets , often specializing in trading 
specific company shares. Examples of organized over -the-counter markets are the 
NASDAQ and upstairs markets in the United States. Trading takes place via a 
computer network. Market makers display the prices at which they are prepared to 
buy and sell, while investors trade with the market makers, usually through 
brokers. The upstairs m arket  is mainly used by institutional investors and handles 
large buy and sell orders (block trades). Institutions place orders through brokers, 
who an attempt to find a transaction counterparty. In the absence of such a 
counterparty, the broker attempts t o execute the order with market makers.  
 
5.3.3.  Electronic stock markets  
Since the middle of 1990s a number of electronic stock markets were created for 
disclosing and executing stock transactions electronically. While publicly displaying buy 
and sell orders of s tock, they are adapted mainly to serve execution of orders institutional 
investors mainly. Registered and regulated electronic stock exchanges developed from 
electronic communication networks (ECN). Some electronic communication networks 
(ECNs) exist along  with official exchanges.  
Concept  
 Electronic communication networks  – order -driven trading 
systems, in which the book of limit orders plays a central 
role. 
The popularity of ECNs stems from the possibility to execute security trade orders 
efficiently. Th ey may allow complete access to orders placed on other organized or 
electronic exchanges, and thus eliminate the practice of providing more favourable quotes 
exclusively to most important clients. As a result quote spreads between the bid and ask 
prices ar e reduced.  
Since ECNs can execute orders of stocks listed and traded on organized or other electronic 
exchanges, they form the increasing competition among the stock exchanges. Examples of 
well known electronic trading systems include Instinet (acquired by  NASDAQ), 
Archipelago (merged into NYSE), SETS (London Stock Exchange’s premier electronic 
trading system).  
As an alternative to organized stock exchanges  the so called alternative trading systems  
(ATS)  have developed, based on the idea there is no necessi ty to use an intermediary in 
order to conduct a transaction between two parties. In fact the services of a broker or a 
dealer are not required to execute a trade. The direct trading of stocks between two 
customers without the use of a broker or an exchange  is called an ATS.  
There are two types of alternative trading systems  (ATS) : 
 crossing networks;  
 dark pools.  
Electronic crossing networks  do not display quotes but match large buy and sell orders of 
a pool of clients (dealers, brokers, institutional invest ors) anonymously. These networks 
are batch processors that aggregate orders for execution. Market orders are crossed once or 
a few times per day at prices, which are determined in the primary market for a security.  88 The trade price is formed as a midpoint b etween bid and ask prices, observed in the 
primary market at a certain time. There is a variety of ECNs, depending upon the type of 
order information that can be entered by the subscriber and the amount of pretrade 
transparency that is available to partici pants. An example of an electronic crossing 
network is POSIT.  
Concept  
 Electronic crossing networks  – order -driven trading 
systems, in which market orders are anonymously matched at 
specified time, determined in the primary market for the 
system.  
Electro nic crossing networks provide low transaction costs and anonymity, which are 
important advantages for large orders of institutional investors. They are specifically 
designed to minimize market impact trading costs.  
However, there is no trading immediacy, since the traders have to wait until the crossing 
session time to execute the orders and an offsetting order entered by other market 
participant. Thus their execution rates tend to be low. Besides, if they draw too much order 
flow away from the main market , they can reduce the quality of the prices on which they 
are basing their trades.  
Dark pools  are private crossing networks, which  perform the traditional role of a stock 
exchange and provide for a neutral gathering place at the same time. Their participa nts 
submit orders to cross trades at prices, which are determined externally. Thus they provide 
anonymous (“dark”) source of liquidity.  
Dark pools are electronic execution systems that do not display quotes but execute 
transactions at externally provided prices. Buyers and sellers must submit a willingness to 
transact at this externally provided price in order to complete a trade.  
The key advantage of dark pools systems is that they are designed to prevent information 
leakage and offer access to undisclos ed liquidity.  
A separate form of computerized trading is program trading , which is defined as 
simultaneous buying and selling of a large portfolio of high rated stocks with a significant 
aggregate value. Another understanding of programme trading refers t o the use of 
computer system (Designated order turnaround (DOT)), which allows traders to send 
orders to many trading posts at the exchange. Program trading is used to reduce the 
susceptibility of stock portfolio to stock market movements, e.g. by selling a number of 
stocks which become overpriced, or by purchasing of stocks which become underpriced.  
The critics of program trading state that it is one of the major reasons for decline or rise in 
the stock market and increases market volatility. Due to these concerns, stock exchanges 
implement collars , which restrict program trading when a wide stock index changes (e.g. 
by 2 percent) from the closing index on the previous trading day. When the collars are 
imposed, program trading for the sell orders becomes al lowed when the last movement in 
the stock price was up (or “uptick”). Conversely, when program trading is for the buy 
orders, it becomes allowed when the last movement in the stock price was down (or 
“downtick”). Such restrictions are supposed to half stab ilizing effect on the market.  
 
5.4. Secondary equity market structure  
Secondary markets are characterized based on the trading procedures.   89 5.4.1.  Cash vs forward markets  
Cash markets are markets where stocks are traded on a cash basis and transactions have 
to be set tled within a specified few days period. Typical period is three days after the 
transaction.  
In order to increase the number of trades most cash markets allow margin trading. 
Margin trading  allows the investor to borrow money or shares from a broker to fi nance the 
transaction.  
Forward markets are markets in which in order to simplify the clearing operations, all 
transactions are settled at a predetermined day, e.g. at the end of a period (month). This is 
a periodic settlement system, in which a price is f ixed at the time of the transaction and 
remains at this value in spite of market price changes by the settlement time. In order to 
guarantee a position, a deposit is required. Such a system does not prevent short -term 
speculation. Some cash markets provide  institutionalized procedures to allow investors to 
trade forward, if they desire.  
 
5.4.2.  Continuous markets and auction markets  
Continuous markets  are markets where transactions take place all day and market makers 
are ensuring market liquidity at moment.  
Deal er market  is the market in which dealers publicly post bid and ask prices 
simultaneously, and these become firm commitments to make transaction at the prices for 
a specific transaction volume. Investors are addressing the dealers offering the best price 
(quote).  
Auction market  is a market in which the supply and demand of securities are matched 
directly and the price is formed as an equilibrium price.  
An open outcry  system allow brokers to negotiate loudly until price, which is an 
equilibrium of buy and se ll orders, is determined.  
In a call auction  market all orders are put into an order book until an auction and are 
executed at a single price. Liquidity requires that such trades take place one or several 
times during a day. Such trading procedures are aim ed at defining the auction price that 
maximizes the trading volume.   
Concept  
 Call auction  – a method of determining the market price of a 
security by finding the price, which balances buyers and 
sellers. Such price fixing  takes place periodically each da y at 
defined time.  
 
5.4.3.  Order -driven markets and quote -driven markets  
The mechanism by which buyers and sellers interact to determine price and quantity of 
securities in the trade is called market structure.   
There are two overall market structures for tradin g financial instruments:  
 order driven and  
 quote driven.   90 Order -driven market structure  allows buyers and seller orders submit their orders 
through their broker. The latter sends these orders to a centralized location, where orders 
are matched and the tra nsaction is executed.  
Concept  
 Order - driven market  – a market without active market 
makers, in which buy and sell orders directly confront each 
other. An auction market . 
There are different forms of order -driven markets. In call markets , the price is de termined 
several times at specified moments. In that way, orders can be collected and the auction 
takes place at the specified time. This type of auction is widely used for initial public 
offerings of equity (and new issues of government debt). The call ma rket mechanism has 
disappeared in secondary markets for bonds and equity, and has been replaced by 
continuous trading systems. In continuous auction markets , public investors send their 
instructions (‘orders’) to buy or sell to brokers.  
Typically order -driven trading systems are computerized. If not all orders at a price can be 
executed, a priority is given to the oldest order. Order driven markets are highly formalised 
as the auction rules for matching trades have to be specified in great detail to ensure  an 
orderly and fair trading process.  
Advances in information technologies have supported the development of order -driven 
markets, in particular for equity trading. The combination of smart trading rules (software) 
with fast computers (hardware) allows an  almost instantaneous matching of orders.  
A group of stock exchanges worldwide (e.g. Paris, Frankfurt stock exchanges) use 
electronic order -driven systems, which allow all limit orders to be stored in the central 
order book. A new arriving order is immedia tely matched with the previously submitted 
orders from the order book. The trader can view all submitted orders and foresee what 
trades will be executed if a new order is entered. The highest limit order and the lowest 
limit order are in fact the bid and a sk prices of the market. One of the examples of trading 
platform of the order -driven system is XETRA, used by Frankfurt stock exchange.  
Quote -driven market structure  is the one , in which market makers or dealers quote the 
prices at which the public market participants are trading. Market makers provide a bid 
quote (to buy) and an ask quote (to sell).  Market makers or dealers earn profit from the 
spread between the two quotes and the turnover of the shares.  
Concept  
 Quote -driven market  – a market in which dealers (market 
makers) adjust their quotes continuously to reflect supply and 
demand. This is a dealer market. Also called price -driven 
market . 
Anyone who wants to trade in a quote -driven market must trade with a dealer. Either the 
investors negotiate wi th the dealers themselves or their brokers negotiate with the dealers.  
Quote -driven markets require little formal organisation, however require mechanisms for 
publishing the dealers’ price quotations and for regulating the conduct of dealers. Stock 
exchang es usually provide the dealers or market makers with privileged access to certain 
administrative procedures or market information. In return for these privileges, dealers 
have particular obligations, i.e. to quote ‘firm’ bid and ask prices at which they gu arantee 
to make trades of up to specified volumes.  
A typical quote -driven system is applied by NASDAQ, in which an automated system 
posts firm stock quotes of the dealers, who place equivalent buy limit orders and sell limit 
orders. However, when posting t he quotes, the dealers do not know, which trades will be 
generated.  
  91 5.4.4.  Hybrid markets  
Hybrid market structures  are the ones, which have elements of, for example, quote -
driven and order -driven market structures.  
A market that integrates traditional floor tra ding with electronic auction trading has been 
developed by NYSE (US). Another example is Euronext, which uses an order -driven 
trading system with a centralised electronic order book. Euronext also enables small and 
medium -sized listed companies to hire a d esignated market maker to act as ‘liquidity 
provider’ in their stock. London Stock Exchange combines electronic order -driven trading 
with liquidity provision by market makers.  
Market structures are often compared from the point of view of their transparen cy and  
liquidity.  In spite of expectations of the same market prices both in quote -driven and 
order -driven markets, in reality quote -driven markets tend to be more fragmented. Dealers 
quote different bid and ask prices, information on executed orders can b e made available 
with some delay (to allow dealers some time to off -load large trades in the market). As a 
result, order -driven markets tend to be more transparent than quote -driven markets.  
Liquidity can be also different. Investors can trade immediately in continuous order -driven 
markets, but have to wait for the next price fixing in a call market. The price, however, 
depends on the availability of sufficient number of orders, i.e. liquidity. Thus investors 
may prefer to negotiate price individually with dealers in quote -driven markets. In quote -
driven markets information about transactions may be delayed also.  
 
5.5. Equity market transactions  
5.5.1.  Bid-ask spread  
When a security is traded, a  dealer, operating as a market -maker, quotes a price at which 
he/she is prep ared to sell – the offer price – and a price at which he/she is willing to buy – 
the bid price. In the transaction t he buyer pays the ask price and the seller receives the bid 
price. The ask price is always above the bid price.  
Concept  
 Ask price  – the pr ice at which market maker is willing to sell 
a security. Also called an offer price . 
 
Concept  
 Bid price  – the price at which market maker is willing to buy 
a security.  
The difference is called the bid –ask spread and is the profit of the dealer :  
Spread  =  ask price – bid price.  
The market bid -ask spread is the excess of the lowest ask price over the highest bid price 
and is normally smaller than the spreads of individual market -makers.  
 
Concept  
 Bid - ask spread  – the difference between the quoted bid and 
ask prices.  
 
Example  Company’s shares are quoted by a broker as bid for 49,8 Euro  92  and 50,0 Euro. The bid - ask spread in percentage is:  
Spread  =  (50,0 Euro – 49,8 Euro)/ 50,0 Euro = 0,2 / 50,0 =  
 = 0,4%  
If investor purchases the share and then immed iately sells it 
before the market price of the share changes, he will incur a 
cost of 0,4% of his investment for the round -trip transaction.  
The bid -ask spread of dealer can be seen as the price to be paid by investors for his 
services. On the other hand , from the perspective of the dealer the spread can be seen as a 
compensation for his costs and risks. The dealer typically holds an inventory of securities 
during the day to be able to sell (and buy) immediately. From his return (i.e., the bid –ask 
spread) , the dealer has to cover the costs of holding his inventory (e.g., interest costs of 
financing the securities inventory) and the risks (e.g., prices may move while the securities 
are in the inventory).  
From the perspective of investors, dealers (in their  role as market -makers) provide two 
important services:  
 possibility to execute a trade immediately from inventory, without having to wait 
for a counterparty to emerge.  
 maintenance of price stability in the absence of corresponding sell or buy orders. 
By trading from their own stockholdings, dealers reduce price fluctuations.  
The dealer costs include the administrative costs of transferring shares.  
The dealer risks arise from price fluctuations and information -based investors.  
For shares that are infrequen tly traded, such as shares in smaller companies, the risks are 
greater, because positions are held for longer periods between trades. If shares are held for 
a long time, the risk of losses from price falls is greater. As a result the bid -offer spreads 
for such shares tend to be relatively high.  
Dealer risk is also related to the possibility of investors possessing information that the 
dealer does not. Such investors are able to make profit at the expense of the dealer. 
Investor can sell shares to the dealer  at a high price, while he is informed about a possible 
fall of share price. As a result the dealer may suffer the loss from a fall in the share price. 
The bid -offer spread is to provide the dealer with compensation for bearing this kind of 
information ris k. 
Dealers have a possibility to negotiate special prices for large transactions. The spread can 
be broader for particularly large transactions (i.e., block trades) to cover the price risk of 
such block trades before the dealer can sell on (or buy) the bou ght (sold) securities to 
(from) other dealers in the market.  
Thus the spread is influenced by the following factors:  
 order costs – costs of processing orders, including clearing costs and costs of 
recording transactions;  
 inventory costs – include the cost s of maintaining an inventory of particular shares;  
 competition – the larger the number of market makers, the greater their 
competition, and the narrower is the spread;  
 volume – the larger the trading volume, the more liquid are the shares, the less risk 
of share price change;   93  risk – the more risky are company operations, the more volatile are its shares, the 
higher spread is set.  
Several research studies showed that bid -ask spreads on specific large stock exchanges are 
wider as they should be. Due to spec ific trading practice, market makers kept their profits 
margins wide. Some analysts called this phenomenon “under -the-table -payment” for order 
flow or the right to execute customers’ trades. Therefore it abuses small investors, who do 
not receive the best price for their quotes.  
Concept  Order flow  – the right to execute customers’ trades.  
 
 
5.5.2.  Placing order  
An investor who wants to buy shares on a stock exchange has a possibility to submit 
different types of orders through a broker.   
Market order  is the simp lest and most common. It requires that the shares should be 
traded at the most favorable price available. The most favorable price is the lowest 
obtainable price for a purchase, and the highest available price for a sale shares. The trade 
then takes place at a price that is currently available in the market.  
Concept  
 Market order  – an order to buy or sell a security 
immediately at the best obtainable price.  
Limit order places a limit on the price at which shares can be bought or sold. Thus it  
specifies pur chase or sale of shares at maximum buying price or minimum selling price, 
respectively.  
The outstanding limit -orders are generally listed in a limit -order book, which allows 
automatic trade matching. However in practice some possibility in setting the pri ority of 
orders remains. Limit orders remain on the limit order book until they are withdrawn by 
the investors, or until they can be executed as a result of new orders arriving.  
Concept  
 Limit order  – an order to buy or sell a security at a specified 
price  or better, i.e. lower for a buy order and higher for a sell 
order.  
Specific types of orders include:  
 Buy limit order (stop buy order) , which specifies that the purchase should take 
place only if the price is at, or below, a specified level.  
 Sell limit o rder (stop loss order) , which specifies a minimum selling price such 
that the trade should not take place unless that price, or more, can be obtained.  
 Market -if-touched order  becomes a market order if the share price reaches a 
particular level. It is diffe rent from a limit order as there is no upper limit to the 
purchase price, or lower limit to the selling price. As soon as trade in the market 
happens at the specified price, the order becomes a market order. However, the 
specified price is not necessarily obtained.  
 Stop order  is also an order that becomes a market order if there is a trade in the 
market at a particular price. However it involves selling of shares after the price 
has fallen to a specified level, or buying after the price has risen to a level . Stop 
orders are aimed at protecting market participants’ profits, or limiting their losses.  94 They seek to ensure that a selling price is not too low, or that a buying price is not 
too high.  
 
Example  
 A broker is intending to by company X shares. He can ac cess 
the central limit order book directly on the internet. The 
following information sell orders (limit prices) and buy 
orders (ask prices) is provided.  
     Sell orders                                                  Buy orders  
Quantity              Lim its                     Limits             Quantity  
1000                         58                          49                    2000  
3000                         54                          48                      500  
1000                         52                          47                    1000  
1000                         51                          46                    2000  
1000                         50                          44                  10000  
A broker has an order to buy 1000 shares  and enter a market 
order to buy those shares. A market order will be executed 
against a best matching order. At what price will he buys the 
shares?  
Another dimension to an order is the length of time for which it remains in force.  
 Fill-or-kill order  is to be cancelled if it cannot be executed immediately.  
 Open order , or good -till-cancelled order , remains in force until it is specifically 
cancelled by the investor.  
 
Example  
 Company X shares is traded at one of European stock 
exchanges and its last transa ction has been at 40 Euro per 
share. An investor entered a limit order to sell the shares at 41 
Euro while the market price was still 40 Euro.  
Company X shares are also traded on NASDAQ as an ADR. 
One ADR represents one fourth of the share (4 ADRs equal 1 
share). ADR price is quoted by a market maker at 10 -10,20. 
Suppose favourable information is disclosed to the market 
participants, which drives company share prices to 45 Euro. 
Who are the parties exposed to losses at the European stock 
exchange and on NAS DAQ if they do not react immediately?  
 
Investors can also specify the period of time for which the order should remain open, e.g. a 
day, a week, or a month.  
 
 
Example  
 Market orders for a company X shares have been entered on a 
crossing network for Europ ean shares. There is one order 
from participant Z to buy 60000 shares, one order from  95 participant Y to sell 30000 shares and one order from 
participant V to sell 40000 shares. Assume that the orders 
were entered in a chronological order and that the networ k 
gives priority to the oldest orders. At the time specified for 
the crossing session, the company X shares are transacted at 
30 Euro on their primary market.  
What trades would take place on a crossing network?  
Assume now that all orders are AON (all or n othing), which 
means that the whole block has to be traded at the same price. 
What trades would take place?  
 
5.5.3.  Margin trading  
Investors can borrow cash to buy securities and use the securities themselves as collateral. 
A transaction in which an investor bor rows to buy shares using the shares themselves as 
collateral is called margin trading  or buying on margin .  
Concept  
 Margin trading  – an arrangement in which an investor 
borrows money or shares from a broker to finance a 
transaction.  
The funds borrowed t o buy the additional stock are provided by the broker, who in his turn 
borrows from a bank. The interest rate that bank charges broker for funds for this purpose 
is called the broker call  rate or call money rate . The broker charges the borrowing 
investor t he call money rate plus a service charge.  
Stock exchange regulations set margin requirement , which does not allow brokers to 
lend more than a specified percentage of the market value of the securities. The aim of 
margin requirement is to discourage excess ive speculation and ensure greater stability in 
the markets. Margin requirement has to ensure that investors can cover their position in 
case the value of their investments into shares reduces. In such a away the possibility of 
default on broker loans shou ld be reduced.  
In order to purchase shares on margin investors have to create an account with a broker, 
which is called a margin account. The initial deposit of cash is called initial margin . 
Concept  
 Margin deposit – the amount of cash or securities that must 
be deposited as guarantee on a futures position. The margin is 
a returnable deposit  
Stock exchange regulations set initial margin requirement , which  is the proportion of the 
total market value of the securities that the investor must pay as an equity  share, and the 
remainder is borrowed from the broker.  
Example  
 Assume an investor buys 200 shares of a stock at 30 Euro per 
share for 6000 Euro of stock on 50% margin and the 
maintenance margin is 30%. By purchasing 6000 Euro of a 
stock on 50% margin, the  investor must put up 3000 Euro of 
cash (or other equity) and so borrows 3000 Euro. The 
investor, however, must maintain 30% margin. Accordingly, 
if the stock price declines 21,43 Euro the stock position has a 
value of 4286 Euro (21,43 Euro × 200 shares). With a loan of 
3000 Euro, the equity in the account is 1286 Euro (4286 Euro 
– 3000 Euro), or 30% of the account value (1286 Euro / 4286  96 Euro = 30%). If the price of the stock decreases below 21,43 
Euro, the investor must deposit more equity to bring the 
equity level up to 30%.  
As time passes, the market value of the shares is changing. The investor’s equity position 
then represents the value of shares, which is left to the investor after the loan from the 
broker is paid back. In order to reduce the possib ility of default, the stock exchange 
regulation rules establish a maintenance margin requirement . This is the minimum 
proportion of the equity in the investor’s margin account to the total market value.  
Concept  
 Maintenance margin – the minimum margin tha t an investor 
must keep on deposit in a margin account at all times.  
 
Example  
 Consider a margin example for a short position. An investor 
shorts (borrows and sells) 200 shares of a stock at 30 Euro for 
a total stock value of 6000 Euro. With an initial ma rgin of 
50%, the investor must deposit 3000 Euro (in addition to 
leaving the 6000 Euro from the sale in the account). This 
leaves the investor with a balance of 9000 Euro (which does 
not change with the stock price since it is in cash).  
However, the invest or owes 200 shares of the stock at the 
current market price. Assuming the maintenance margin is 
30%, if the stock price rises to 34,62 Euro the 200 shares are 
worth 6923 Euro or 30% of the market value of the position 
(2077 Euro / 6923 Euro) and additional  margin must be 
posted.  
The use of borrowed funds for investments into shares can magnify the returns on the 
investment. However, when borrowed funds are used, any losses are also magnified.  
 
Exercise  
 
 Assume investor X has 59500 Euro to invest and is 
considering buying corporation’s shares at a price of 59,5 
Euro per share. With his 59500 Euro investor X can buy 1000 
shares (ignoring commissions). Suppose investor’s X broker 
can arrange for him to borrow an additional 59500 Euro so 
that investor X can b uy an additional 1000 shares. Thus by 
investing 119000 Euro, he can purchase a total of 2000 
shares. The 2000 shares will be used as collateral for the 
59500 Euro borrowed, and investor X will have to pay 
interest on the amount borrowed.  
By borrowing funds , an investor creates financial leverage. 
Investor X, for a 59500 investment, realizes the consequences 
associated with a price change of 2 000 shares of the 
corporation rather than 1 000 shares. He will benefit if the 
price rises but will be worse off if the price falls (compared to 
borrowing no funds).  
If the price of corporation’s shares rises to 68,5 Euro per 
share, ignoring commissions and the cost of borrowing, 
investor X will realize a profit of 9 Euro per share on 2,000 
shares, or 18000. Had investo r X not borrowed 59500 Euro to  97 buy the additional 1000 shares, his profit would be only 9000.  
If the price of corporation’s shares decreases to 52,5 Euro per 
share, then, by borrowing to buy 1000 additional shares, 
investor X will lose 7 Euro per share on  2000 shares instead 
of 7 Euro per share on just 1000 shares.  
The return from the investment into securities is influenced by the proportion of the 
investment that comes from borrowed funds.  
The return on stock purchased on margin is defined:  
r = (SP – INV – L + D ) / INV  
where SP – is the selling price of securities,  INV – is initial investment by investor not 
including borrowed funds,  L – loan payments on borrowed funds including principal and 
interest payments,   D – dividend payments on the security . 
Example  
 Assume investor decides to purchase on margin company 
shares, which have current market price of 60 Euro per share. 
Annual dividend is 3 Euro per share. The investor pays 30 
Euro per share in cash and borrows the remaining amount 
from a broker a t 10% interest p.a. After a year the share is 
sold in the market at 90 Euro per share.  
The return for the investor is equal:  
r = (90 – 30 – 33 + 3 ) / 30 = 100%  
However, if the share price declines to 40 Euro and is sold for 
that price, the return over a year will be equal to:  
r = (40 – 30 – 33 + 3 ) / 30 = - 66,7%  
 
If the investor’s margin account falls below the minimum maintenance margin (which 
would happen if the share’s price fell), the investor is required to transfer additional cash. 
The investor r eceives a margin call  from the broker specifying the additional cash to be 
put into the investor’s margin account. If the investor fails to put up the additional cash, 
the broker has the authority to sell the securities for the investor’s account. Because of 
potential margin calls, a large volume of margin lending exposes the stock market to 
potential crisis. When a sudden huge downturn in the market happens, many margin calls 
are submitted. This may force investors to sell their share holdings, if they do not have 
sufficient cash to transfer in order to reach required maintenance margin. Such sales place 
additional downward pressure on share prices and magnify the negative effect in the 
market.  
 
5.5.4.  Short selling  
In a short selling, investor place an order to s ell a security that is not owned by the investor 
at the time of sale. Investors sell the stock short (or short the stock) when they expect 
decline of the stock price.  
They arrange to have their broker borrow the stock from other investor, and the borrowed 
stock is delivered to implement the sale. To cover their short position, investors must 
subsequently purchase the stock and return it to the party that lent the stock. Thus investor,  98 who owns the stock is unaffected when his shares are borrowed, are not aw are about the 
fact that their shares were borrowed.  
If the stock price declines by the time the short -seller purchases it in the market in order to 
return to the investor, from whom he has borrowed, the short seller earns a profit from the 
difference betwe en the initial selling price and the subsequent purchase price of the stock. 
However, his profit will be less, if he has to pay to the investor, from whom he has 
borrowed the stock, dividends which the investor would have received if he had not 
borrowed th e stock.  
The risk of a short sale is that the stock price may increase over time, which forces the 
short -seller to pay a higher price for the stock than the price at which it was initially sold.  
Stock markets and financial analysts provide information on l evel of short sale. Several 
indicators are used to measure the short position on stock:  
 a degree of short positions.  It is a ratio of the number of shares that are currently 
sold short, divided by the total number of shares outstanding. Statistics shows, t hat 
most often this measure is in the range of 0,5 -2%. A high measure of 3% shows a 
large number of short positions in the market, which may indicate that a large 
number of investors expect the stock price to decline.  
 Short interest ratio for specific shar es. It is the number of shares which are 
currently sold short, divided by the average daily trading volume over the recent 
period. The higher the ratio, the higher the level of short sales. The ratio of 20 or 
more reflects an unusually high level of short sales, indicating that many investors 
believe that the stock price is currently overvalued. For some stock this ratio may 
exceed 100 at particular points in time.  
 Short interest ratio for the market . The higher the ratio, the higher the level of 
short sell ing activity in the market overall.  
Investors, who have established a short position, quite often request a stop -buy order to 
limit their losses.  
 
 
5.5.5.  Stock trading regulations  
Stock market regulations aim at ensuring fair treatment of all investors in the m arket. 
Stock trading is regulated by national securities exchange commissions and by individual 
stock exchanges. It is widely understood, that the development of financial markets and 
success of new issues of securities cannot be handled without efficient and fair secondary 
stock markets.  
Analysis of average real returns on stock in the well developed markets indicate that 
historically it has been about 6% percent higher than return on Treasury bills, which 
reached on average only 1% p.a. The difference bet ween the return on stocks and the risk -
free-rate is a measure of risk premium on equities. However, the size of this risk premium 
is not justified by the stock market’s risk exposure, if only investors are assumed to be 
unreasonably averse to risk. The res earch has shown that only 0,35% of an equity premium 
can be justified as risk premium. Such persistent overpricing of risk premium is called an 
equity premium puzzle . 
 Concept  
 Equity premium puzzle  – the persistent overpricing of risk 
premium on stocks.   99 If the equity premium puzzle is the result of security mispricing, then there is an arbitrage 
opportunity. It means that investor can gain by borrowing at the Treasury bill rate and 
investing in stocks. Borrowing limitations and transaction costs may reduc e this arbitrage 
profit, but not eliminate it.  
The concern about the fair and ethical stock market trading require imposing discipline on 
individuals and institutional investors. The organized stock exchanges introduce 
surveillance of all transactions at the exchanges. Computerized systems are installed to 
detect unusual trading of any particular stock. Any abnormal price or trading volume of 
particular stock or unusual trading practices of market participants is investigated.  
Additional regulations on imp osing good corporate governance practice for listed 
companies are imposed through introduced corporate governance codes. Regulations 
require disclosure of financial statements, having a majority of independent directors (not 
employees of the companies) on their boards of directors. Such requirements are aimed at 
reducing existing or potential conflicts of interest between management and minority as 
well as majority shareholders, focusing management on maximizing stock value for 
company shareholders.  Specifi c regulation concerns are related to restrictions on trading in 
case of market downturns.  
Stock exchanges can impose circuit breakers , which are restrictions on trading when 
stock prices or stock indexes reaches a specified threshold level. The necessity of such 
restriction became vivid during stock market crashes, e.g of NYSE in October 1987 and 
the later ones. When market maker swamp market with sell orders, stock prices cannot 
reflect the fair value any longer and move into a freefall. The market experi ences huge 
liquidity crisis, which feeds panic and exacerbates the price decline. As a result of such 
experience, in order to provide time for market participants to regroup and obtain backup 
sources of liquidity, a series of circuit breakers are put to us e.  
Concept  
 Circuit breakers  – automatic halts or limitations in trading 
that are triggered upon the attainment of certain stipulated 
price moves.  
The NYSE prevailing circuit breakers have three threshold levels for a daily change of 
Dow Jones Industrial  average index from its previous closing level: Level 1 – 10%, Level 
2 – 20%, Level 3 – 30%. If the Level 1 threshold is reached, there is a brief 30 or 60 
minute halt in trading. If the Level 2 threshold is reached, there is a slightly longer 1 to 2 
hour halt in trading. If the Level 3 threshold is reached, the market is closed for a day. 
NASDAQ and other large international exchanges impose similar circuit breakers.  
Concept  
 50 point collar  – provision that prohibits computer assisted 
trading if Dow Jones  Industrial average index rises or falls by 
50 points.  
 
Concept  
 250 point rule  – provision that halts all trading for one hour 
if Dow Jones Industrial average index falls by 250 points in a 
day. 
Trading halts  may be imposed on particular stocks if stock  exchanges believe that market 
participants need more time to receive and absorb material information, which can affect 
stock price. Such trading halts are imposed of stocks that are associated with mergers and 
acquisitions, earning reports, lawsuits and o ther important news. The purpose of them is to 
ensure that market has complete information before trading on the news. A halt may last a 
few minutes, hours or several days. Trading is resumed after it is believed that the market 
has complete information. T his does not prevent investors from a trading loss in response  100 to the news. However, it can prevent from excessive optimism or pessimism about a stock, 
and can reduce stock market volatility. Drawbacks of trading halts are related to slowing 
down the inevi table adjustment of stock prices to the news.  
 
5.6. Equity market characteristics  
5.6.1.  Stock indicators  
Trading of stocks in the secondary market is related to stock price changes.  Investors 
monitor stock price quotations, provided in financial websites and press. Though format is 
different, most of tem provide similar information.  
Stock exchanges provide information on market  capitalization , which  is the market’s 
valuation of the firm and is found by multiplying the number of shares by their market 
price.  
Earnings per share  are net profits attributable to common shar eholders divided by the 
number of common shares outstanding.  
Annual dividend  is a net profit portion distributed to the shareholders over the last year on 
a per share basis.  
Dividend yield  is the annual dividend per share as a percentage of the stock’s actual price.  
The price/earnings ratio (P/E ratio)  is the reciprocal of the earnings yield. It conveys the 
same information but avoids the use of percentages.  
Concept  
 Price / earnings ratio (P/E ratio)  – the ratio of the stock 
market price to the earnings per share. Sometimes called 
earnings multiplier . 
If a firm has a high P/E ratio, the indication is that the market values it highly for some 
reason other than current earnings. The usual presumption is t hat future earnings are likely 
to grow rapidly and the price increased in its anticipation. Shares of another company in 
the same sector might be judged ‘cheap’ if their P/E ratio were low by comparison (for no 
obvious reason).  
Stock quotations also includ e volume  of shares traded the previous day. Stock price 
quotations show the “last” or closing price  on the previous session.  
 
5.6.2.  Stock market indexes  
Stock market indexes are measures of the price performance of stock portfolios, which are 
formed to represent  a stock market as a whole or a specific segment of the market, or sub -
indexes. The well - known indices include the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the Standard 
& Poor’s 500 in the United States; the FTSE 100 in the United Kingdom; the Nikkei 225 
in Japan; t he DAX in Germany; the CAC 40 in France; and the Hang Seng in Hong Kong. 
National stock markets have at least one index, and some countries with well developed 
stock markets (in particular the United States) have numerous indexes.  
Indices can be categorize d by the way:  
 the number of stocks included;  
 the method of weighting the stock prices;  
 the method of averaging.   101 The number of stocks  can vary from a small number of largest most liquid company 
stocks to a wide portfolio of all stocks traded on a particul ar market. The indexes based on 
a small number of stocks have the advantage of easy calculation; however they can hardly 
represent stock market as a whole.  
Weighting of the stock prices is diverse. Contribution of individual stock prices to an 
index may be   
unweighted (as in the case of the Financial Times Ordinary Share Index),   
value weighted (for example the Financial Times Stock Exchange (FTSE) 100) ,  
price weighted (such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average).  
In the case of unweighted indexes all stocks  equal influence irrespective of the sizes of the 
companies. Average of daily rates of share price change is calculated each day and gives 
stock price change average on one day. The product of such changes starting from a base 
date provides the index. The calculation involves two stages: 1) averaging stock price 
changes on a single day; 2) compounding the daily averages over time.  
Example  
 An average of 10% rise of share prices on one day is 
followed by an average 20% rise of share prices the next.  
This gi ves a rise of 32% over the two days: 1.1 x1.2 =1.32 . 
Thus unweighted index is equal to 1,32.  
Indexes have a number of uses:  
 to measure and monitor market movements;  
 To provide a means of ascertaining changes in aggregate wealth over time.  
 To perform a rol e as barometers of the economy; in particular stock market 
movements tend to be leading indicators which means that they provide indications 
of likely future changes in the level of activity in the economy as a whole. Fourth, 
they provide a means of evalua ting the performance of fund managers by providing 
benchmarks against which portfolio managers can be compared.  
 To provide the basis for derivative instruments such as futures and options;  
 To provide the framework for the creation of tracker funds, which is to reflect the 
performance of a stock market.  
 To be used by capital market models, in particular the capital asset pricing model 
(for discount rates for capital projects, estimating required rates of return on shares, 
deriving fair rates of return for utilities).  
Value weighted and arithmetically averaged indexes a key ones. In order to measure stock 
market values, an index has to reflect accurately the total market capitalization. An 
arithmetically averaged value -weighted index accurately measures the aggregate value of 
the stocks covered by its index. A reliable measure of the total value of the market is also 
required for measuring changes in aggregate wealth over time and as a basis for derivative 
instruments.  
 Example  
 Suppose index is based on just  three stocks whose prices and 
numbers of shares issued are the following.  
Stock A      Price 50Euro, total 10 million shares  
Stock B      Price 100Euro, total  10 million shares   102 Stock C      Price 200Euro, total 5 million shares  
The changes relate to just  one day (so no compounding over 
time is involved). Supposed  
(a) that stock A rises in price by 15% during the day while 
the other two prices remain unchanged, and  
(b) that stock C undergoes a 15% price rise while the other 
two prices remain constant dur ing the day.  
Before the price rise, the index equals 100.  
In the event of a 15% rise in the price of A, the new index 
will be (using arithmetic means):  
(New value / Old value) x 100 =  
= (1, 15 + 1 + 1) / (1 +1 +1)  x 100 = 1,05 x 100 =105  
If the price of  C rises by 15%, the new index will be:  
(New value / Old value) x 100 =  
 = (1 + 1 + 1,15) / (1 +1 +1)  x 100 = 1,05 x 100 =105  
It can be seen that a 15% rise in either stock price has the 
same effect on the index despite the fact that C has a higher 
stock  price and is issued by a larger company.  
Arithmetically averaged value -weighted stock indices are the only indices that are 
macroconsistent, i.e. it is possible for all investors to hold the index portfolio 
simultaneously.  An index portfolio is a portfol io of shares that matches a stock index in 
terms of its constituent shares and their relative proportions.  
The large r number of stocks is covered by an index, the more effective it is.  
Indices that provide a very broad coverage, and hence reliably reflect the whole market, 
are referred to as broad capitalization  indices. A good broad capitalization index is 
characterized by completeness  and investability . This should make it possible for fund 
managers to buy all the shares in the index. Investability is par ticularly important for the 
managers of index tracker funds , but may require some sacrifice of completeness in order 
to eliminate illiquid stocks.  
The calculation of value -weighted indices has moved towards a free -float basis and away 
from a total capital ization basis. Free float includes only those shares that are available for 
purchase, rather than all shares. The free float basis excludes shares held by governments, 
founding families, and non -financial companies.  
The stock -index weighting is thus based on the total value of a company’s shares available 
for purchase, and not on the full market capitalization of the company.  
Weighting for multi -country stock indices is subject to discussion. One view is to weight 
each country by its contribution to global market capitalization. However the ratio of stock 
market capitalization to national income (GDP) varies considerably between countries. 
Another view is to use national income (GDP) rather than market capitalization for 
weighting. .This approach would provi de a more stable weighting since relative GDP is 
less volatile than relative market capitalization.  
Exercise  
 Three companies belong to a group and are listed on the stock 
exchange:   103 Company A owns 20% of company B,  
Company B owns 30% of company C,  
Company C owns 10% of company A.  
Each company has a total of market capitalization of 100 
million Euro.  
You wish to adjust for cross -holding to reflect the weights of 
these companies in a market capitalization -weighted index. 
What adjustments would you make to ref lect the free -float?  
Two types of emerging -market stock index are available. There are indices based on total 
market capitalization and indices based on the shares available for foreign investors. The 
performances of the two different types of index can b e significantly different.  
Stock indexes are used by institutional investors as benchmarks for performance 
measurement. Index tracker funds aim to replicate the performance of an index.  
Although most stock indexes are based on arithmetic averages, there are some that use 
geometric averaging. However geometric averaging has particular problems. The 
geometric mean overestimates the effects of rises in the prices of smaller company stocks 
and underestimates the effects of changes in the stock prices of large r companies. Since 
large corporations are large because of rapid growth in the past, it follows that the use of 
geometric means gives too little weight to the stock prices of rapidly growing companies 
and too much weight to the stock prices of slow growth companies. So the use of 
geometric means underweights stocks, whose prices rise rapidly, and overweights stocks, 
whose prices increase slowly. In consequence, over time, indices based on geometric 
means tend to understate the true rate of increase in stock  prices. The cumulative effect of 
such understatement over time can substantially distort the calculated market rise.  
 
5.6.3.  Stock market indicators  
In order to characterize and compare national as well as international stock markets, a 
number of indicators are being used.  
Market size  is characterized by market capitalization. Relative national market 
capitalizations give indications of the importance of each country to international 
investors. Market capitalization weights are used in the global benchmarks. Thus  market 
size forms the basis for global investment strategies.  
Market liquidity.  In liquid markets investors can be more active and design various 
arbitrage strategies. Market illiquidity tends to imply higher transaction costs. Thus those 
investors, who m easure performance relative to a global benchmark, will tend to be more 
passive on such illiquid markets.  
Market illiquidity can be measure by transaction volume  and turnover ratio . Turnover 
ratio is sometimes called share turnover velocity . 
Concept  
 Turno ver ratio or share turnover velocity  – is the ratio 
between the annual transaction volume and the market 
capitalization.  
Price volatility is an important measure in the secondary market, but might also be 
important to the operations of the primary market.  High volatility means that buyers in the 
primary market are subject to a considerable risk of losing money by having to sell at a  104 lower price in the secondary market. This can reduce the motivation to buy in the primary 
market.  
Two factors that affect th e price volatility of securities in the secondary market are the 
depth and breadth of that market.  
The depth of the market  is based on the likely appearance of new orders stimulated by 
any movement in price. If a rise in price brings forth numerous sell o rders, the price rise 
will be small. A decline in price that stimulates many buy orders would be a small decline. 
A deep market would be characterized by the appearance of orders that tend to dampen the 
extent of any movement in price. Greater depth is thu s associated with lower volatility.  
Breadth of that market reflects the number and diversity of the traders in the market. If 
there is large number of market participants with differing motivations and expectations, 
then there is less likely to be substant ial price changes, compared to when there is small 
number of traders, or when the traders have common views such that they buy or sell 
together. A broad market is a large heterogeneous market characterized by relative price 
stability . 
Concentration. Also c alled degree of concentration  can be measured based on market 
capitalization for specific stock exchanges, as well groups of stock exchanges in a region. 
This an important measure for investors interested to know if a national market is formed 
of a large n umber of diverse companies, or concentrated on a few companies. Institutional 
investors are reluctant to invest in small companies, fearing that they offer poor liquidity. 
Besides, it is easier for investors to track performance of a market index (based on  market 
capitalization weights), if it is dominated by a few large issues. A market dominated by a 
few large companies provides less opportunities for risk diversification and active 
portfolio strategies.  
 
5.6.4.  Transaction execution costs  
Transaction costs are an important aspect of implementing an investment strategy. 
However, measurement of trading costs meets difficulties.  
Trading costs consist of two major components:  
 explicit costs and  
 implicit costs.  
Explicit trading costs  are the direct costs of tradin g, such as broker commissions, fees, 
and taxes. The main explicit cost is the commission fee, which is paid to the broker for 
execution of an order. Commission costs are fully negotiable and vary systematically by 
broker type and stock market mechanism. Th e commission fee may be set, dependent upon 
both the price per share and the number of shares in the transaction.  
In addition to commissions, other explicit costs include custodial fees, which are the fees 
charged by an institution that holds securities i n safekeeping for an investor, and transfer 
fees, consisting of the fees associated with transferring an asset from one owner to another.  
Implicit trading costs  represent such indirect costs as the price impact of the trade and the 
opportunity costs of fai ling to execute in a timely manner or at all. Whereas explicit costs 
are associated with identifiable accounting charges, no such reporting of implicit costs 
occurs.  
Implicit trading costs include  
 impact costs,   105  timing costs, and  
 opportunity costs.  
The impact cost of a transaction is related to the change in market price due to supply and 
demand imbalances, caused by the trading transactions. Bid -ask spread estimates fail to 
capture the fact that large trades — those that exceed the number of shares the ma rket-
maker is willing to trade at the quoted bid and ask prices — may move prices in particular 
direction. That is, large trades may increase the price for buy orders and decrease the price 
for sell orders. The resulting market impact, or price change due to the transaction can be 
described as the deviation of the transaction price from the “unperturbed price” that would 
prevail if the trade did not occur.  
The timing cost of a trade is measured as the price change between the time the market 
participants as sume responsibility for the trade, and the time they complete this 
responsibility for the transaction. Timing costs occur when orders are on the trading desk 
of a buy side company (e.g., an investment management company), but are not yet 
released to the br oker, because the trader fears that the trade may swamp the market.  
The opportunity cost of a trade is the “cost” of securities not traded. This cost results from 
missed or only partially completed trades. These costs are the natural consequence of the 
trade order delays. For example, if the price moves too much before the trade can be 
completed, the asset manager will not make the trade. In practice, this cost is measured on 
shares not traded based on the difference between the market price at the time of decision 
and the closing price 30 days later.  
Commission fees and impact costs are actual and visible; however, the opportunity costs 
and timing costs are the costs of forgone opportunities and are invisible. Opportunity costs 
can arise for two reasons. F irstly, some orders are executed with a delay, during which the 
price moves against the investor. Secondly, some orders incur an opportunity cost because 
they are only partially executed or are not executed at all.  
Exercise  
 An asset manager follows an act ive international asset 
allocation strategy . The average execution cost for a buy or a 
sell order is forecasted at 0,5 percent. On average the 
manager turns the portfolio over 1,5 times a year. The annual 
expected return before the transactions costs is 10  percent. 
What is the annual return net of execution costs?  
Several methods of reduction of transaction costs  are applied by institutional investors:  
 Internal crossing , i.e. manager attempts to cross the order with an opposite order 
for another client of the firm;  
 External crossing , i.e. manager sends the order to an electronic crossing network;  
 Principal trade , i.e. the manager trades through the dealer, who guarantees full 
execution at a specified discount or premium to the prevailing price. The dealer 
then acts as principal, because he commits to taking the opposite side of the order 
at the firm price.  
 Agency trade , i.e. when fund manager negotiates a competitive commission fee 
and selects a broker on the basis of his ability to reduce total execution co sts. This 
way the search for the best execution is delegated to the broker.  
 Use of dealer indications of interest (IOI) . Some party may wish to engage in an 
opposite trade for a stock or a basket of stocks. Pooling IOIs from various dealers 
helps to identi fy possible pools of liquidity.   106  Use of futures. There is an opportunity cost associated with the delay of execution 
of large trade. The fund manager could use futures to monitor the position while 
the trade is executed.  
Seeking to control (minimize) the c osts, institutional investors have developed computer -
automated programs to enter trading orders. The use of computer programs for this 
purpose is known as algorithmic trading . Once an asset manager makes a decision to buy 
or sell a large stock position, t he program separates the trade into several smaller orders so 
as to minimize transaction costs. Sometimes algorithmic trading is confused with 
automated trading. The latter uses computer programs to make investment decisions about 
which shares to buy or se ll. Algorithmic trading is used to determine how to place the 
order. However, algorithmic trading does not require that the decision of which shares to 
buy or sell be made by automated trading.  
 
5.7. Stock market efficiency  
Investors do not like risk and they m ust be compensated for taking on risk —the larger the 
risk, the more the compensation. An important question about financial markets, which has 
implication for the different strategies that investors can pursue, is:  
Can investors earn a return on financial  assets beyond that necessary to compensate 
them for the risk?  
Economists refer to this excess compensation in the stock markets as an abnormal  return . 
Whether this can be done in a particular financial market is an empirical question. If a 
strategy is id entified that can generate abnormal returns, the attributes that lead one to 
implement such a strategy is referred to as a market anomaly.  
This problem of how efficiently financial market is pricing the assets traded in  those 
market, is referred to as market efficiency. An informationally  efficient market is defined  
as a financial market where asset prices rapidly reflect all available public information.  
Concept  Efficient market  – a market in which any relevant 
information is immediately impounded in asse t prices.  
This means that all available information is already impounded in an asset’s price, so 
investors should expect to earn a return necessary to compensate them for their 
opportunity cost, anticipated inflation, and risk. That would seem to preclude  abnormal 
returns.  
Check question  
 What are market forces that tend to make financial markets 
informationally efficient?  
As investors attempt to capitalize on new information, which is not already accounted for 
in prices, the stock prices should adjust i mmediately. It is commonly agreed that investors 
over- or under -react to information. This does not mean markets are inefficient unless the 
reaction is biased (consistently over - or under -reacting). In this case investor, who 
recognizes the bias, will be a ble to earn abnormally high risk adjusted returns.  
Check question  
 How should investors behave in a market that is 
informationally efficient? How does this differ from 
behaviour in a market that is not informationally efficient?  
This concept is illustrate d in Figure 14. Before the information becomes public, the 
security has an old value. The new information hits the market. In an efficient market the 
price instantly adjusts to its new equilibrium level. If the market is inefficient, the market  107 may underreact or overreact to new information. If there is underreaction, the price 
adjustment is gradual. If there is overreaction, the market price overshoots the new 
equilibrium value. If market is inefficient, between the time of the news r evelation and the 
adjustment to the new equilibrium value, informed investors would be able to profit at the 
expense of less sophisticated investors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Market reaction to new information  
 
According to Fama (1 970), there are three levels of efficiency:  
 Weak form efficiency  
 Semi -strong form efficiency  
 Strong form efficiency  
Weak form of market efficiency  suggests, that current asset prices reflect all past prices 
and price movements, i.e. all trade -related infor mation. In other words, all worthwhile 
information about previous prices of the stock has been used to determine today’s price. 
So the investor cannot use the same information to predict tomorrow’s price and still earn 
abnormal profit. Empirical evidence f rom the most of world stock markets suggests that 
these markets are weak -form efficient. In other words, it is not possible to outperform 
(“beat”) the market by using information on past stock prices.  
Concept  
 Random walk theory  – a theory stating that all  current 
information is reflected in current security prices and that 
future price movement are random because they are caused 
by unexpected news.  
The view that price changes cannot be predicted has been called the random walk 
hypothesis. According to it,  price changes are drawn from a probability distribution which 
does not change over time. This constant distribution assumption is a subset of weak form 
of efficiency. Weak form of efficiency can hold, even though the distribution of prices 
shifts over tim e. New information  Underreaction  Perfect 
efficiency  Overreaction  
Old v alue New value  
Time  Price   108 Semi-strong form of market efficiency  suggests that current stock prices reflect all 
publicly available information. The difference between public information and market 
related information is that public information also includes announcements of compa ny 
events, economic and political news and events. Thus, if investors employ investment 
strategies based on the use of publicly available information, they cannot earn abnormal 
profits. It does not mean that prices change instantaneously to reflect new inf ormation, but 
rather that information is accounted for rapidly in stock prices.  
Testing semistrong efficiency raises two serious problems. First, a model of the 
determinants of the stock prices has to be chosen. Second, tests of the model have to 
distingu ish between the anticipated and unanticipated information. Fully anticipated 
information should be already incorporated into security prices. Only unanticipated 
information or surprises have an impact on stock prices.  
Empirical evidence supports the idea t hat the largest world stock markets are for the most 
part semi -strong efficient. This, in turn, implies that careful analysis of companies that 
issue stocks cannot consistently produce abnormal returns.  
Strong form of market efficiency assumes that  asset p rices reflect all public and private 
information. In other words, the market (which includes all investors) knows everything 
about all securities, including information that has not been released to the public. The 
strong form implies that you cannot make abnormal returns from trading on inside 
information, where inside information is information, which is not yet public.  
Corporate insiders (directors, large shareholders) are a group of market participants, who 
are involved in management and have access to  non -public information. Profit from 
insider information through short -term trading gains is illegal. However, they are allowed 
to buy and sell securities of the company they are employed in, for long -term investment 
purposes. Such transactions are called insider trading and have to be disclosed to securities 
exchange commission and to the public.  
Stock market analysis has shown that when insiders are trading company shares, usually 
their results are good. Therefore, insider reports to securities exchange c ommission has 
become an important source of investor’s information.  
In merger and acquisition transactions the price of the acquired firms stock tends to rise 
significantly before public announcement of the transaction. The assumption is made, that 
some i nsiders may be profiting from non -public information.  
Another group of research is related to investment fund earnings analysis. For example, it 
has shown that average fund earns fair rates of return at the certain the risk levels. 
However in some studies the experts forecasted interest rates do not beat the simple 
extrapolation of the current interest rates. The studies showed that the current interest rate 
is a better forecast of the next period interest rate than the experts’ forecasts.  
Besides, investme nt advisory services have not managed to produce return larger than a 
fair return. This evidence is consistent with market efficiency hypothesis.  
On the whole, the strong form of market efficiency is not supported by the empirical 
studies. In fact, event studies state that the opposite is true; gains are available from inside 
information. Thus, various stock markets, as the empirical evidence suggests, are 
essentially semi -strong, but not strong efficient.  
Check question  
 What are the differences among the  three forms of market 
efficiency?  
  109 Check question  
 How can you describe empirical evidence concerning the 
three forms of the efficient market hypothesis?  
The implications for market efficiency for issuers of shares is that if the financial markets 
in wh ich they issue securities are semi -strong efficient, issuers should expect investors to 
pay a price for those shares that reflects their value. This also means that if new 
information about the issuer is revealed to the public (for example, concerning a ne w 
product), the price of the security should change to reflect that new information.  
Concept  
 Volatility – a measure of uncertainty about the future price of 
an asset. Typically measured by the standard deviation of 
returns on the asset.  
 
5.8. Stock valuation  
In order to make investment decisions investors conduct valuation of stocks. They search 
for undervalued stocks for investing and sell holdings of stocks if they are considered 
overvalued.  
There are two approaches to what information is useful in the sele ction of stocks and the 
timing of the purchase of stocks:  
 fundamental analysis and  
 technical analysis.  
 
5.8.1.  Fundamental analysis  
Fundamental analysis  is one of the methods of valuing stocks, which  involves the 
analysis of a company’s operations to assess its  economic prospects. It is based on 
fundamental financial characteristics (e.g. earnings) about the company and its 
corresponding industry that are expected to influence stock values. The analysis is based 
on financial statements of the company in order to  investigate the earnings, cash flow, 
profitability, and financial leverage. The fundamental analysis includes analysis of the 
major product lines, the economic outlook for the products (including existing and 
potential competitors), and the industries in which the company operates.  
This analysis results in projections of earnings growth. Based on the growth prospects of 
earnings, the fair value of the stock using one or more of the equity valuation models is 
determined. The fair value is based on present value calculations.  
Concept  
 Present value  – the current value of a future cash flow. It is 
obtained by discounting future cash flow by the market –
required rate of return.  
There are various models to estimate the fundamental value of company shares. One 
approach is to estimate expected earnings and then multiply by expected price/ earnings 
ratio. Another approach is to estimate the value of the assets of the company.  
Check question  
 Describe the price/earnings multiple approach to investing. 
What determin es the company’s multiple? Are multiples 
stable over time? What does this approach assume about 
market efficiency?   110 The estimated fair value is compared to the market price to determine if the stock is fairly 
priced in the market, cheap (a market price bel ow the estimated fair value), or rich (a 
market price above the estimated fair value).  
Traditional fundamental analysis has several limitations. It does not quantify the risk 
factors associated with a stock and how those risk factors affect its valuation.   
In a perfectly efficient market all securities are always correctly priced. The market price 
equals to the fundamental value of the security. In a market that is partially inefficient, the 
market prices deviate from fundamental value. Financial analysts aim to discover the 
fundamental value ahead of the rest of the market participants before the market prices 
approach the fundamental value in order to make profits. The actions of such profit -
seeking investors push the market towards efficiency.  
 
5.8.2.  Technica l analysis  
The aim of the technical analysis is to identify stocks that are candidates for purchase or 
sale, and the investor can employ technical analysis to define the time of the purchase or 
sale. Such analysis is used not only for investigation of comm on shares, but also in the 
trading of commodities, bonds, and futures contracts. This analysis can be traced back to 
the seventeenth century, where it was applied in Japan to analyze the trend in the price of 
rice. The father of modern technical analysis i s Charles Dow, a founder of the Wall Street 
Journal and its first editor in the period of 1889 -December 1902.  
Technical analysis  ignores company fundamental information, focusing instead on the 
study of internal stock market information  on price and tradi ng volume of individual 
stocks, groups of stocks, and the overall market, resulting from shifting supply and 
demand. Technical analysts believe that stock markets have a dynamic of their own, 
independent of outside economic forces.  
Concept  
 Technical anal ysis – a forecasting method for asset prices 
based solely on information about the past prices.  
Technical analysis  is aimed to determine past market trends and patterns from which 
predictions of future market behavior are derived. It attempts to forecast short -term price 
movements. The methodology of analysis is based on the belief that stock market history 
tends to repeat itself. If a certain pattern of prices and volumes has previously been 
followed by particular price movements, it is suggested that a r epetition of that pattern will 
be followed by similar price movements.  
Question  
 What is technical analysis? Why is there a difference between 
technical analysis and efficient markets?  
The study of past patterns of variables such as prices and trading vol umes allows investors 
to identify times when particular stocks (or sectors, or the overall market) are likely to fall 
or rise in price. The focus tends to be on the timing of purchases and sales.  
H. Levy has suggested that technical analysis is based on t he following assumptions:  
1. The market price of securities (such as shares and bonds) is determined by supply and 
demand.  
2. Supply and demand are determined by numerous rational and irrational factors. These 
include both objective and subjective factors.   111 3. Apart from minor fluctuations the prices of individual securities, and the level of the 
market as a whole, tend to move in trends which persist for significant periods of time.  
4. Trends change in reaction to shifts in supply and demand. These shifts i n supply and 
demand can be detected in the action of the market itself.  
Assumptions 3 and 4 are controversial.  
Supporters of the efficient market hypothesis (EMH) take the view that new information is 
very quickly reflected in security prices. If informat ion is very quickly reflected in prices, 
trends do not have an opportunity to emerge. Technical analysts believe that new 
information does not arrive in the market at a single point in time; they take the view that 
new information comes to the market over a period of time. For example new information 
may be available first to insiders, second to professionals, and lastly to the public.  
As the information gradually becomes more widely available, the share price gradually 
moves to its new equilibrium price. T echnical analysts look for the beginning of a 
movement from one equilibrium price to another without attempting to predict the new 
equilibrium price.  
They attempt to profit from forecasting the direction of movement; that is they try to 
identify trends and  profit from them.  
Whatever the reason for a change in price, if the share price responds sufficiently slowly, a 
trend emerges. A slow response of prices to shifts in supply and demand provides the 
potential to profit from technical analysis.  
There are man y technical analysis  and trading techniques, including chart and non -chart 
ones.  
Price charts  are a more frequent technique. Price charts are made for each day, or other 
chosen time interval, with the help of a vertical line. The top of the vertical line i ndicates 
the highest price reached during the day and the bottom shows the lowest price. A short 
horizontal line on each vertical line indicates the closing price on the day.  
A variety of price charts include line charts, Japanese candlestick charts, a po int-and-
figure.  
One aim of the charts is to find areas where price reversals are frequent since this is seen 
as presaging a substantial price movement (break out from a trading range).This would 
appear as a horizontal stretching out of the chart.  
Technical  analysts use a vast number of chart patterns .  
Price channels (Trend channels).  Trend channels can be horizontal, upward or downward 
sloping. The share price remains within the channel, and some points in time breaks out of 
the channel. If it breaks out o f the channel in a downward direction, the chartist may 
interpret this as a signal to sell the stock since it is seen as forecasting a fall in the stock 
price, and vise versa. Price channels are often interpreted in terms of the bounds providing 
limits to the extent of variation of share prices, such that share prices tend to remain within 
the bounds.  
Reversal patterns.  Chartists frequently believe that when the direction of a share price (or 
market index) changes, characteristic chart patterns may develop as the turn occurs. One of 
those reversal patterns is head -and-shoulders  configuration. The highest peak is the head, 
and the lower peaks are the shoulders. When the share price falls below the lower peak, 
further price fall is forecasted and eventually co nstitutes a sell signal.  
Converse reasoning would explain the use of reverse head -and-shoulders, which indicates 
that stock prices will rise and that therefore shares should be bought.   112 Moving averages.  Technical analysts use not only prices relating to ind ividual dates, but 
also moving averages. A moving average is an average of a series of previous prices, for 
example the average of the last 200 daily prices. (Each day the oldest price is removed 
from the calculation of the average and the most recent pric e introduced). Chart patterns 
can be based on moving averages as well as daily prices.  
One popular technique is to use moving averages and daily prices on the same chart. If the 
current price is a predetermined percentage above or below the moving average , a buy or 
sell signal may be indicated. For the market as a whole, the proportion of stocks currently 
above their moving average is seen as an indicator of general market sentiment. Points at 
which a chart of daily prices crosses a chart of moving average s are seen as significant. A 
daily price chart that crosses a moving average chart from below might be seen as 
providing a buy signal. The signal may be dependent upon whether the moving average is 
rising or falling at the time.  
Studies have suggested that  moving average strategies could be successful, e.g. stock 
returns following buy signals from a moving average rule were higher than those 
following sell signals.  
Dow theory . This is  one of the oldest technical tools, aimed to forecast the future direction  
of the overall stock market. Dow theory is based on the belief that market movements are 
analogous to movements of the sea. It sees three simultaneous movements in the market. 
Daily and weekly fluctuations correspond to ripples. Secondary movements (which  last a 
few months) are the waves. Primary trends of a year or more are analogous to tides. It is 
the primary trend that is referred to as either a bull or a bear market. The daily or weekly 
movements are seen as having little or no predictive value. Howev er, secondary 
movements in stock indices are used to forecast changes in the direction of the primary 
trend. A bull market is characterized by both high and low points of successive secondary 
movements moving in an upward trend, especially if this were acc ompanied by rising 
volumes of stocks traded.  Each new peak is above the previous peak, and each new trough 
is above the previous trough.  
Trading volume should increase with moves made in the direction of the primary trend; for 
a rising primary trend, volu me should be heavier for advances than for falls. The market is 
sustained by rising support levels and would break through successively higher resistance 
levels. When the market eventually falls through a support level and then is unable to 
bounce back bey ond a previous resistance level, the beginning of a bear market is signaled.  
A bullish primary trend is seen as being initiated by informed investors, who anticipate a 
recovery. Subsequently uninformed investors start buying, thereby reinforcing the upward  
trend.  
While the uninformed investors continue to buy, the informed investors start to sell. Sales 
by informed investors cause the temporary downturns (the waves).  
Elliot wave theory. The theory sees markets as moving in cycles. There are very long -run 
cycles that last many decades. Superimposed on these are cycles of shorter duration. In 
turn there are cycles of even shorter duration superimposed upon the latter cycles. This 
pattern of cycles within cycles continues down to cycles of very short duration.  
Analysis of the Elliot cycles is based on waves. Each cycle has eight waves. Five waves 
carry the market up and three waves carry it down. At the end of the cycle the market is 
higher than at the beginning.  
The pattern of waves entails a succession of su pport and resistance levels, similarly to 
Dow theory. Elliot wave theory assumes that markets are driven by investor psychology. 
After a fall in prices, investor optimism is seen as growing slowly at first but later the  113 optimism becomes excessive and leads  to a bubble at which prices peak. The bubble bursts 
and the market is then carried lower in the wave pattern.  
Elliot wave theory is sometimes supplemented by the use of Fibonacci numbers . Fibonacci 
numbers seem to fit the pattern of development of a range  of natural phenomena from the 
reproduction of petals on a flower to the formation of galaxies. They are also believed to 
explain stock market developments. Fibonacci numbers are taken from a sequence in 
which each number is found by adding together the pr evious two in the series. The 
sequence runs 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, and so forth. Users of the theory employ various 
combinations and ratios of Fibonacci numbers to predict market tops and bottoms, along 
with support and resistance levels. Elliot wav e theory sees cycles as comprising eight 
waves, five on the upswing and three on the downswing, which are Fibonacci numbers.  
Technical analysts also use other indicators , such as filter rules, relative strength, and 
short interest ratios.  
Filter rule  states that an investor should buy when a stock price (or market index) has 
risen by a predetermined percentage above a previous low point. Conversely, the investor 
should sell when the price or index falls by a particular percentage below a previous high. 
The percentages are decided by the investor, but they should be established prior to the 
market movements.  
Relative strength  is measured by the ratio of a stock price to a market index. Changes in 
the ratio are taken to indicate buy or sell opportunities. Fo r a momentum trader a rise in the 
ratio is a signal to buy the stock (and a fall is a signal to sell).A contrarian trader would 
interpret a rise in the ratio as a sell signal (and a fall as a buy signal).  
The short interest ratio  is the ratio of short sale s to total trading. A rise in the ratio has 
two opposite interpretations. First, a rise in the ratio as indicative of bearish sentiment, and 
hence is a sell signal. Second, a rise is a buy signal, since it is believed that the short 
positions will have to be covered by stock purchases. These stock purchases would tend to 
push up stock prices.  
Trin statistic  is the ratio of the average trading volume in stocks with declining prices to 
average volume in stocks rising prices. Ratio above 1 show a bearish mark et, since a 
relatively high volume of trades in declining stocks is indicating net selling pressure. 
Conversely, ratios below 1 are seen as indications of a bullish market.  
Trading volume  is considered an indication of the strength of a trend. If a price m ovement 
is accompanied by a relatively high quantity of trades, it is considered more significant 
than the price movement in a low trading volume market.  
Breadth of the market  shows the extent to which movement in a market index is 
reflected widely in the price movements of individual stocks. The most common measure 
of breadth is the difference between the number of stocks that rise and the number that fall. 
If the difference is large, the market movement is considered to be strong, since it is 
widespread. A market rise is viewed stronger, if prices of large majority of stocks are 
rising. Conversely, market rise is viewed as weaker, when only prices of stocks of a few 
large capitalization companies are increasing.  
Mutual fund cash holdings, if they increase,  might an indication  of a market rise based 
on belief that the cash will be used to buy shares. This demand for shares would tend to 
push prices up. Conversely, low mutual fund cash holdings are seen as a bearish signal.  
Put-call ratio.  Put options give t he right to sell shares at a specified price, and are bought 
by investors who expect share prices to fall. Call options give the right to buy shares at a 
specified price, and are bought by investors who expect share prices to rise. The ratio of 
puts bought  to calls bought is used as an indicator of the expectations of investors.  114 However technical analysts have different interpretations of the ratio. Some see a high put -
call ratio as a sign of a bearish market based on the belief that it indicates that inves tors in 
general expect stock price falls. Others have a contrarian view, and see a high put -call ratio 
as a buy signal. Contrarian analysts base their analysis on the belief that investors are 
usually wrong.  
Technical analysis is often, though regarded as an essential tool of investment analysis by 
market practitioners, however is criticized by academics. The criticism from academics 
tends to focus on the absence of a coherent body of theory to explain technical analysis, 
and on the difficulty of using stat istical tests to ascertain its effectiveness.  
The past theories proposed by technical analysts tended to be ad hoc and inconsistent. 
There has been no coherent rationale as to why technical analysis should work. However, 
the recent development of behaviora l finance is contributing to the emergence of 
theoretical justifications of technical analysis.  
If social and psychological forces influence stock market behavior in consistent ways, 
technical analysis could be seen as a technique for identifying those fo rces and forecasting 
their effects. Besides, behavioral finance can also be applied to explain the behavior of 
technical analysts. Technical analysts may be influenced by the same social and 
psychological biases as other market participants. Those biases w ould tend to influence 
technical analysts’ interpretations of their charts and other data. The forecasts of technical 
analysts could be affected by the same biases, which the analysts may be seeking to 
identify among other market participants.  
Institutiona l investors tend to use technical analysis alongside other methods of investment 
analysis. The research evidence on the ability of institutional investors to outperform stock 
market indices indicates that, at best, such outperformance is marginal.  This ev idence 
throws doubt on the effectiveness of investment analysis, including technical analysis. 
However since the stock market in aggregate is equal to the sum of investment portfolios, 
such findings might be expected. Investment analysis may be a zero -sum game in that 
those making profits make them at the expense of other analysts.  
 
5.9. Processes of consolidation of stock exchanges  
The importance of equity finance in the world markets is growing, although there are large 
differences across stock exchanges. The market capitalisation of the largest world markets 
(e.g. NYSE, NASDAQOMX, Euronext, London Stock Exchange (LSE)) are much higher 
than those of other stock exchanges. Stock market is highly concentrated.  For example, 
measured by trading activity, the market  share of the five largest stock exchanges in 
Europe exceeded 90 per cent in 2009, with the LSE having the largest share of total EU 
turnover. The stock -market concentration level is almost identical in terms of market 
capitalisation. This high level of co ncentration may be explained by the fact that financial 
exchanges exhibit network externalities, as higher participation of traders on both sides of 
the market positively affects market liquidity and increases traders’ utility. For some of the 
key stock ma rkets it appears that even if market capitalisation is similar in value (e.g. LSE 
and Euronext), there are significant differences in the turnover. This suggests that when 
shares are more actively traded, the stock market provides for a deeper and more liq uid 
market.  
Despite the increase in equity finance, public equity markets play a limited role as a source 
of new funds for firms that raise external financing generally via bank loans or debt 
securities. Still, the number and value of initial public offeri ngs (IPOs) grew spectacularly 
from the mid -1990s.   115 The recent development of the stock exchanges has shown an intensive regional cross -
border consolidation, which is especially vivid among EU stock markets. Euronext 
resulted from a merger of the Paris, Amst erdam, Brussels, and Lisbon stock exchanges 
during 2000 –2002. Stock exchanges of Copenhagen, Stockholm, Helsinki, Tallin, Riga, 
Vilnius, and Iceland merged between 2004 and 2006, creating the OMX Nordic Exchange. 
It was followed by a merger of NASDAQ and O MX Nordic Exchange to form 
NASDAQOMX.  In June 2007 Italy’s stock -exchange operator Borsa Italiana accepted a 
takeover from the LSE. In 2006, a trans -Atlantic stock exchange merger took place 
between Euronext and the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), strengt hening its position 
as the largest securities trading venue in the world.  
In 2007, two other trans -Atlantic deals were announced: an acquisition of the  International 
Securities Exchange (New York) by Deutsche Börse and a merger between NASDAQ and 
OMX to fo rm NASDAQOMX.  
Processes of consolidation are fostered by multiple share listings of the companies. 
Multiple share listing happens when company shares are listed on more than one stock 
exchange. They can also be simultaneously traded on formal stock exchang es and OTC 
markets. Stocks of very large multinational companies list their shares on several national 
stock exchanges. Trading in such stocks can effectively be global and may operate on a 
24-hour basis (as one exchange closes, trading may continue on oth ers). 
Further globalization of financial markets is related to the tendency for financial markets 
in different countries to become integrated into a single market. A major factor leading to 
globalization has been the development of telecommunications. Othe r factors have been 
the tendencies towards international diversification of portfolios, and deregulation of 
national financial markets.  
Consolidation is viewed to have several advantages. Larger exchanges enjoy economies of 
scale that reduce trading costs,  which in turn attracts more traders and listed companies. 
After the merger market capitalisation of the merged stock exchanges has grown faster  
than that of its smaller competitors.  
While consolidation allows an exchange to exploit economies of scale, it may also reduce 
competition and thus lower an exchange’s incentive for financial innovation (in the form 
of developing new, cheaper, trading mechanisms). The impact of competition is interesting 
in equity trading. Competition may reduce trading fees, but f ragmentation of the order 
flow between exchanges may reduce the liquidity of equity trading. However, some of the 
stock market studies have found evidence of reduced fees and improved liquidity. 
Liquidity is improved as some brokers automate the routing de cision between the two 
exchanges to obtain the best execution price. In that way, the order flow at the two 
exchanges is indirectly combined.  
There are still some challenges for further consolidation in stock markets. First, the 
clearing and settlement inf rastructure in Europe has remained fragmented so far. Studies 
suggest that post -trading costs per transaction in the EU are substantially higher than in the 
US. Next, cross -border exchanges like Euronext and NASDAQ OMX force national 
financial supervisors to co -operate.  
 
5.10. Summary  
Equity markets exist to facilitate the transfer of funds from savers of funds to investors, 
which need to raise money. Organized stock exchanges as well as over the counter markets 
ensure that a secondary market provides a means fo r existing investors to sell their equity 
securities.   116 Newly issued shares are sold in the primary market by public offer, tender, placement, or 
through a rights issue. In addition to common (ordinary) shares there are various types of 
preferred shares.  
Stock exchanges may be order -driven, quote -driven, or a hybrid of these two systems. In 
all stock market trading systems share prices are determined by the demand and supply. 
The key types of orders are market orders, which accept the existing share price, an d limit 
orders which specify upper limits to buying prices or lower limits to selling prices.  
Most individual investors buy equity instruments indirectly through institutional investors 
such as pension funds, insurance companies, and investment funds. The refore most of the 
trading on stock exchanges is done through institutional investors. Some types of 
institutional investment, like investment funds or exchange -traded funds (ETFs), trade 
their own shares on a stock exchange directly.  
Stock markets operat e most efficiently if they have sufficient depth and breadth. A deep 
market has a large number of traders, who ensure that small price movements raise many 
new buy or sell orders. This helps to avoid excessive share price volatility, since price falls 
are met by new purchase orders, and price rises are met by new sell orders. A broad 
market contains traders with differing opinions such that some will be forecasting price 
rises whilst others expect falls.  
The diversity of views helps to prevent large price swings. When stock markets are 
characterized by uniformity of opinion, extreme share price movements can result. If the 
overwhelming majority of investors expect a rise, there would be many buyers and few 
sellers. Sharp price rises (a bubble) would result.  If the majority expects a price fall, sales 
would dominate purchases and share prices could fall dramatically (and a stock market 
crash can occur).  
 
Key terms  
 Initial public offering (IPO)  
 Leveraged buy -out 
 Stock repurchases  
 Bid-ask spread  
 Market order  
 Limit order  
 Short sale  
 Program trading  
 Transaction costs  
 Buying on margin  
 Maintenance margin  
 
Further readings  
1. Baele, L., A. Ferrando, P. Hördahl, E. Krylova, and C. Monnet (2008), 
Measuring European Financial Integration, in: X. Freixas, P. Hartmann, and C .  117 Mayer (eds.), Handbook of European Financial Markets and Institutions, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, p.165 –194. 
2. European Central Bank (2006), Equity Issuance in the Euro Area, Monthly 
Bulletin, May, p.89 –99. 
3. Fama, Eugene F. (1965), “Random Walks in St ock Market Prices,” Financial 
Analysts Journal , No. 21 (5), p.55 –59. 
4. Fama, Eugene F (1990), “Stock Returns, Expected Returns, and Real Activity,” 
Journal of Finance , No. 45 (4), p.1089 –108. 
5. Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1992), “The Cross -Section o f 
Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance , No. 47 (2), p.427 –65. 
6. Foucault, T. and A. J. Menkveld (2008), Competition for Order Flow and Smart 
Order Routing Systems, Journal of Finance, No. 63, p.119 –158. 
7. Kazarian, E. G. (2006), Integration of the Secur ities Market Infrastructure in the 
European Union: Policy and Regulatory Issues, IMF Working Paper 06/241.  
8. Levy H. (1978). Equilibrium in imperfect market. A constraint on the number of 
securities. American Economic Review, No. 68, September, p. 643 -658. 
9. LSE, NYSE, OMX, Nasdaq, Euronext . . . Why Stock Exchanges Are 
Scrambling to Consolidate, (2006), Knowledge@Wharton, Wharton School, 
University of Pennsylvania.  
10.Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1988), “Management 
Ownership and Market V aluation: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial 
Economics , No. 20, p.293 –315. 
11.Myers and Majluf ( 1984 ). Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when 
Firms have Information that Investors do not Have, Journal of Financial 
Economics, No. 13, 187 –221. 
12.Schich S., Wehinger G. (2003). Prospects for Stock exchanges// Financial 
market Tends, No. 85, OECD.  
13.Shiller ( 2003 ). From Efficient Markets to Behavioral Finance, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, No. 17, p.83 –104. 
14.Serifsoy, B. and M. Weiß (2007), Sett ling for Efficiency – A Framework for the 
EuropeanSecurities Transaction Industry, Journal of Banking and Finance, No. 
31, p.3034 –3057.  
 
Relevant websites  
 www.nasdaqomx.com  
 www.n yse.com  
 www.londonstockexchange.com  
 www.finance.yahoo.com   118  
Review questions and problems  
1. Discuss the concept of asymmetric information. Explain how it may cau se 
managers to serve company investors.  
2. Describe how interactions between buyers and sellers affect the market value of 
the firm.   
3. Why do firms engage in IPOs?  
4. What is the danger of issuing too much equity shares in an IPO?  
5. What is the role of the investm ent bank that serves the underwriter in an IPO? 
How can it ensure, that the firm does not issue too much shares?  
6. What factors influence the offer price in an IPO?  
7. Explain the differences between generating funds from a venture capital firm and 
through an I PO. Why does a firm do a road show before it goes to an IPO?  
8. Explain why the stock price of a firm may rise when the firm announces that it is 
repurchasing its shares.  
9. Discuss the statement: “IPO transfers wealth from unsophisticated investors to 
large in stitutional investors who get in at the offer price and get out quickly.”  
10. A pharmaceutical company is going through an IPO. It plans to issue 5 million 
shares at 12 Euro per share. The investment bank suggests that the offer price for 
the shares should be 10 Euro per share to ensure that all the shares should be sold 
easily. Explain the dilemma for the pharmaceutical company. What is the 
advantage of following the advice of the investment bank? What is the 
disadvantage? Is the investment bank incentive to p lace the shares aligned with 
the interests of the pharmaceutical company?  
11. Explain the difference between a market order and a limit order.  
12. How can margin requirement affect the potential return and risk from investing in 
shares?  
13. What is the maintenance ma rgin?  
14. How would the return on stock be affected by a lower initial investment and a 
higher loan amount? Explain the relationship between the proportion of funds 
borrowed and the return.  
15. Describe the short selling process. Under what conditions investor mig ht consider 
short selling a specific stock?  
16. What are electronic communication networks (ECNs)?  
17. What is programme trading?  
18. Describe the functions securities exchange commission.  
19. What is the role of depository?  
20. Assume a company’s shares are priced at 50 Eur o per share. The company has 
declared 1Euro per share dividend. An investor purchases the stock on margin 
paying 30 Euro per share and borrowing the remainder from the dealer at 10 % 
annualized interest. What is the return to the investor, if after one yea r the stock is 
sold at a price of 60 Euro per share?   119 21. What determines the size of the bid -ask spread?  
22. Calculate the bid -ask spread for 100 000 shares of X company for the following 
market prices in US NYSE:  
a) bid price 11 7/8, ask price 12 ¼;  
b) bid price 44 1 /4, ask price 44 17/64;  
c) bid price 35 3/8, ask price 35 ½.  
15. A company with 20 million Euro assets and 45 million Euro liabilities is 
technically insolvent. Which of the following investment projects is preferred by 
stockholders and which is preferred by bon dholders?  
a) 22 million investment into a project, which will be worth 24 million with a 
probability of 60% and  20 million with a probability of 40%;  
b) 22 million investment into a project, which will be worth 40 million with a 
probability of 5% and  20 million with a probability of 95%;  
c) explain, how elimination of equity’s limited liability could resolve the 
problem?  
16. A money market fund is started with assets consisting of 75 day zero coupon debt 
instruments with a face value of 200 million Euro, and a simple interest yield of 
3,9%.  
a) what is the value of the fund liabilities sold to shareholders?  
b) if interest rates rise by 100 basis points, what is the net asset value of the 
money market fund’s assets?  
c) if the fund is liquid immediately upon the increase in rates, what is the net asset 
value paid out to each fund shareholder?  
17. What is the impact on retirement benefits if a 2,5 billion Euro pension fund 
experiences a 2% default rate on its assets, if  
a) it is defined benefit fund that pays retired p eople 35% of the average of their 
last three years of salary?  
b) it is defined contribution fund that obligates the firm to contribute matching 
funds equal to 50% of the employees’ contributions;  
c) it is a defined contribution fund with no matching funds contributed to the 
employer.  
18. Calculate the net asset values and share prices of the following mutual funds:  
a) a 500 000 million shares of an open – end money market fund with assets 
consisting of 91 day Eurodollars CDs with face value of 350 million USD, which 
yields 6,25% annually, and 250 day prime -rated commercial paper with face 
value of 330 million USD, which yields 6,1% annually (use simple yields on a 
365 day basis);  
b) closed -end Baltic fund with assets consisting of 10 years 6,7% annual coupon 
bonds, yielding 12,5% annually, with a face value of 25 million Euro, and a 
perpetual preferred shares with a cumulative annual dividend of 7%, face value of 
30 million Euro and the annual yield of 12,4%.    
 
   120 6. DERIVATIVES  MARKETS  
 
Mini contents   The meaning of hedging against risk  
 Definition of derivatives markets  
 Financial futures and hedging against risk  
 Options and their use  
 
6.1. Hedging against risk   
Investments based on some underlying assets are known as derivatives. The capital 
invested is less than the p rice of the underlying asset. This creates financial leverage and 
allows investors to multiply the rate of return on the underlying asset. Because of this 
leverage, derivatives have several uses,  
 Speculative or taking an advantage over specific profit oppo rtunity,  
 Hedging a portfolio against a specific risk.  
Participants in derivative markets own portfolios of financial securities, which must be 
taken into consideration when understanding impact of any particular derivatives 
transaction.  
Any derivatives t ransaction involves cash flows, which are more or less opposite to the 
cash flows generated by the other securities in the portfolio. When the two sets of cash 
flows moves in the opposite direction, it is a hedge . When the two sets of cash flows 
moves in t he same direction, it is a speculative position . This is why speculative trades 
increase risk exposure, while hedging reduces risk exposure.  
Hedging ensures counterbalancing cash flows, which reduce dispersion of possible 
outcomes and therefore reduces the  risk. Conversely, by adding more cash flows, which 
move in the same direction, speculating increases profit when outcomes are favourable, 
but increases losses when outcomes are unfavourable. Thus the risk is increased.  
The underlying cash position is the twin transaction that is undertaken simultaneously with 
the derivatives trade. The underlying cash position motivates the hedge transaction. If the 
underlying cash position consists of only one financial security, then it is called 
microhedge. If the under lying cash position consists of a portfolio of financial securities, 
then it is called macrohedge.  
Macrohedging is prevalent in financial institutions than in non -financial companies, which 
may be hedging only a single financial security on their balance sheets. The hedge is 
always tailored to the hedger’s underlying cash position. The hedger’s cash flows as well 
as his goals will determine the configuration of the derivatives transaction.  
 
6.2. Description of derivatives markets  
The establishment and growth of  financial derivatives markets has been major 
development trend in financial markets over the past thirty -five years. Financial innovation 
and increased market demand led to a rapid growth of derivatives trading. Development of 
financial derivatives was sp eeded up by the globalization of business, the increased 
volatility of foreign exchange rates, and increasing and fluctuating rates of inflation.   121  
Concept  
 Derivatives - securities .bearing a contractual relation to 
some underlying asset or rate.  
In gene ral derivatives  contracts promise to deliver underlying products at some time in the 
future or give  the right to buy or sell them in the future.  They can be based on different 
types of assets (such as equities or commodities), prices (such as interest rat es or exchange 
rates), or indexes (such as a stock -market index).  
The derivative contract can then be traded in a different market from that in which the 
underlying product (equity, bonds, currency) is itself traded. Markets in which underlying 
products ar e traded (such as the forex market) are often referred to as cash markets to 
distinguish them from derivatives  markets.  Although cash and derivatives markets are 
separate, the derivatives markets are linked to cash markets through the possibility that a 
delivery of the underlying product might be required.  
There is a close relationship between the prices of derivatives contracts and the prices of 
the underlying assets they represent, and that the value of a derivative, and hence its price, 
varies as the pr ice in the cash market fluctuates. However, in practice, derivatives seldom 
lead to the exchange of the underlying product. Instead, contracts are closed out or allowed 
to lapse before the delivery date arrives.  
For portfolio managers change of the risk pr ofile through derivative transactions takes a 
very low cost. Without derivatives, portfolio managers have to conduct transactions in the 
underlying cash markets (i.e., money, bond, or equity markets) at a higher cost, including 
the costly transfer of secur ities. Thus the dynamic growth of hedge funds can be explained 
by the rise of low -cost derivatives markets. Hedge funds typically exploit small price 
differences of similar financial products. Only when the transaction cost is smaller than the 
price differ ential, then hedge fund takes a position.  
The types of derivatives  include:  
 Options,  
 Forwards,  
 Futures,  
 Swap contracts  
 Various forms of bonds.  
 A forward contract gives the holder the obligation to buy or sell a certain underlying 
instrument (like a bond)  at a certain date in the future (i.e., the delivery or final settlement 
date), at a specified price (i.e., the settlement price). Forward contracts consist of futures 
and swaps. Futures contracts are forward contracts traded on organised exchanges. Swaps 
are forward contracts in which counterparties agree to exchange streams of cash flows 
according to predetermined rules. For example, an interest -rate swap is a derivative in 
which one party exchanges a stream of interest payments for another party’s stream  of 
cash flows. The most important difference with options is that options give the holder the 
right (but not the obligation) to buy or sell a certain underlying instrument at a certain date 
in the future at a specified price.  
Derivatives are traded on org anised exchanges or over -the-counter (OTC) market. 
Derivatives contracts traded and privately negotiated directly between two parties belong 
to the OTC market, generally interest -rate linked derivatives, like swaps and forward -rate 
agreements. All contract  terms, such as delivery quality, quantity, location, date, and price,  122 are negotiable in it. The total value of derivative contracts  outstanding in global OTC 
markets is substantially higher than the exchanges -traded amount. A trend is a provision of 
stand ard contracts, which makes it easier for more participants to access the OTC markets. 
Besides, OTC trades are increasingly being cleared through clearinghouses in much the 
same way as exchange -based contracts.  
Derivative contracts like futures and options , which are traded in organised exchanges are 
generally standardised, based on electronic trading. The traditional distinction between 
exchange -based and OTC derivatives is becoming less clear.  
 
6.3. Forward and futures contracts  
6.3.1.  Principles of forward and futu res contracts  
A futures contract  is a legally binding commitment to buy or sell a standard quantity of a 
something at a price determined in the present (the futures price) on a specified future date.  
The buyer is called the long, and the seller is called the short . Futures contracts are “ zero 
sum games ”.  
Concept  
 Futures contracts - a customized contract to buy (sell) an 
asset at a specified date and a specified price (futures price). 
The contract is traded on an organized exchange, and the 
potential gain / loss is realized each day (marking to market).  
 
The forward contract  is a private agreement between the two parties and nothing happens 
between the contracting date and the date of delivery.  
Concept  
 Forward contract - a customized contract to buy (sel l) and 
asset at a specified date and a specified price (forward price. 
No payment takes place until maturity.   
Forwards and futures contracts markets include diverse instruments on:  
 Currencies;  
 Commodities;  
 Interest rate futures;  
 Short -term deposits;  
 Bond s; 
 Stock futures;  
 Stock index futures;  
 Single stock futures (contract for difference).  
There is no money exchanged when the contract is signed. To ensure that each party 
fulfills its commitments, a margin deposit  is required. The exchanges set a minimum 
margin for each contract and revise it periodically. Margin is determined depending upon 
the risk of the individual contract  
Futures prices fluctuate every day. Therefore all contract positions are marked to market  
at the end of every day. If net price movem ents result in gain on a position of the previous 
day, the customer immediately receives cash in the amount of the gain. And vise versa, if 
there is a loss, the customer must cover the loss. As soon as a customer’s account falls  123 below the maintenance margi n, the customer receives a margin call to fill up the initial 
margin. If this is not done immediately, then the broker closes down the position on the 
market.  In effect future contracts are canceled every day and replaced by new contracts 
with a delivery price equal to the new futures price, i.e. the settlement price at the end of 
the day.  
It is rare for a futures contract to be used for the exchange or physical delivery of the 
underlying instruments. Many contracts have no facility for the exchange of the  financial 
instrument. Thus financial futures markets are independent of the underlying cash markets, 
and are operating in parallel to those markets. Most future contracts are closed out by an 
offsetting position  before the delivery occurs.  A long offsets  by going short and the short 
offsets by going long at any time before the delivery date.  
Offsetting does not involve incremental brokerage fees because the fee to establish initial 
short position includes the commission to take the offsetting long positio n, i.e. the round 
trip commission . 
The total number of outstanding contracts is called open interest . For every outstanding 
contract one person is short (has taken a short position) and one is long (has taken a long 
position. If a particular transaction in volves a new long and a new short, the open interest 
increases by one contract. If a transaction involves offsetting by an existing long and 
offsetting by an existing short, the open interest decreases by one contract. However, if a 
transaction is made by offsetting an existing short or long, and if the other side of 
transaction is a new investor, the open interest remains unchanged. Each futures exchange 
has a clearing house to keep track of the short and long positions.  
Concept  
 Open interest  or a financi al instrument at some specified 
future date.  
The main economic function of futures is to provide a means of hedging. A hedger seeks 
to reduce an already existing risk. This risk reduction could be achieved by taking a futures 
position that would provide p rofit in the event of a loss on the underlying position (and a 
loss in the case of a profit on the underlying position).  
Concept  
 Long hedge – a long anticipatory hedge generally involving 
buying futures contracts in anticipation of spot purchase . 
 
Concep t 
 Short hedge – a short hedge involves selling futures 
contracts to cover the risk on a position in the spot market. 
This is the most common use of hedging in investment 
management . 
The most common products underlying futures contracts are foreign curren cies (exchange 
rates), interest rates on notional amounts of capital, and stock exchange indices. The 
futures contracts are themselves tradable – that is, they can be bought and sold in futures 
markets. To increase their tradability, futures contracts are standardized in terms of both 
time period and amount. They specify the quantity and quality of the underlying product, 
the agreed price and the date of delivery.  
The procedure of marking to market of futures contract, which implies that all potential 
profi ts and losses are immediately realized, is the basis for the key difference between the 
forward and future contracts.  
A forward contract may or may not be marked to market. Where the counterparties are two 
high-credit -quality entities, the two parties may agree not to mark positions to market.  124 However, if one or both of the parties are concerned with the counterparty risk of the 
other, then positions may be marked to market. When a forward contract is not marked to 
market, then there are no interim cash flo ws. 
Because there is no clearinghouse that guarantees the performance of a counterparty in a 
forward contract, the parties to a forward contract are exposed to counterparty risk, the 
risk that the other party to the transaction will fail to perform.  
When hedging the specified source of risk two questions have to be answered:  
 Which contract should be used?  
 What amount should be hedged?  
The answer to the first question depends upon the source of risk, which will dictate the use 
of some specific stock market index, interest rate or currency contract.  
The answer to the second question depends upon optimal hedge ratio to be used .  
The hedge ratio is the ratio of the size of the (short) position to be taken in futures contract 
to the size of the exposure (the val ue of the portfolio to be hedged).  
Hedge ratio = ( Number of contracts x Size x Spot price ) / V  
where V – is the market value of the underlying asset position.  
The number of contracts to be sold if hedge ratio, that is to be implemented, is known, can 
be derived from this equation:  
 N = Hedge ratio x V / ( Size x Spot price)  
Example  
 Assume the manager of a futures fund has 1000000 Euro. 
The fund manager buys FTSE 100 futures relating to 
1000000 of shares when the FTSE 100 stands at 5000.The 
futures matur e in one year.  
Let’s determine the key characteristic of the contract  
The number of futures contracts bought will be equal:  
1,000,000/(5000 x 10) = 20 contracts  
Does any of the 1000000Euro need to be used in the purchase 
of the futures? Yes, the initial ma rgin must be provided  
The approximate capital gain on the fund over a year, if the 
FTSE 100 rises by 7%, will be equal to 7% (minus the net 
cost of carry).  
In order to find the total return on the fund, interest on the 
money on deposit plus interest on mai ntenance margin (i.e. 
interest on approximately 1,000,000) should be added to the 
capital gain.  
 
6.3.2.  Forward and futures valuation  
Valuation of all derivative models are based on arbitrage arguments. This involves 
developing a strategy or a trade wherein a p ackage consisting of a position in the 
underlying (that is, the underlying asset or instrument for the derivative contract) and 
borrowing or lending so as to generate the same cash flow as the derivative. The value of 
the package is then equal to the theor etical price of the derivative. If the market price of  125 the derivative deviates from the theoretical price, then the actions of arbitrageurs will drive 
the market price of the derivative toward its theoretical price until the arbitrage 
opportunity is elimin ated.  
The pricing of futures and forward contracts is similar. If the underlying asset for both 
contracts is the same, the difference in pricing is due to differences in features of the 
contract that must be dealt with by the pricing model.  
A futures price  equals the spot (cash market) price at delivery, though not during the life of 
the contract. The difference between the two prices is called the basis : 
Basis = Futures price – Spot price = F – S 
The basis is often expressed as a percentage of the spot pri ce (discount or premium) =  
Percentage basis =  ( F – S ) / S  
Futures valuation models determine the theoretical value of the basis. This value is 
constraint by the existence of profitable riskless arbitrage between the futures and spot 
markets for the asse t. 
In a well -functioning market, when arbitrageurs implement their strategy by selling the 
futures and buying underlying asset, this would force the futures price down so that at 
some price for the futures contract, the arbitrage profit is eliminated. This  strategy that 
results in the capturing of the arbitrage profit is referred to as a cash-and-carry trade . The 
reason for this name is that implementation of the strategy involves borrowing cash to 
purchase the underlying asset and “carrying” that underlyin g asset to the settlement date of 
the futures contract.  
In general, the formula for determining the theoretical price of the contract, assuming that 
lending and borrowing rates are both the same and equal to financing cost, and that there is 
no margin,  be comes:  
Theoretical futures price = Spot price + ( Spot price) x (Financing cost  - Cash yield)  
where financing cost -  is the interest rate to borrow funds, cash yield -  is the payment 
received from investing in the asset (e.g. dividend) as a percentage of  the cash price.  
Example  
 Assume that the underlying asset price is 100 Euro, financing 
cost is 1% and cash yield is 2%. Then the theoretical futures 
price is:   100 Euro + [100 Euro × (1% − 2%)] = 99 Euro  
The future price can be above or below the spot (cash) price depending on the difference 
between the financing cost and cash yield. The difference between these rates is called the 
cost of carry  and determines the net financing cost . 
Positive carry  means that the cash yield exceeds the financing cost, while the difference 
between the financing cost and the cash yield is a negative value.  
Negative carry means that the financing cost exceeds the cash yield.  
Zero futures  happen when the futures price is equal to the spot (cash) price.  
At the settlement date of the futures contract, the futures price must equal the s pot (cash 
market) price. The reason is that a futures contract with no time left until delivery is 
equivalent to a s pot (cash market) transaction. Therefore, as the delivery date approaches, 
the futures price is converging to the s pot (cash market) price. This happens as financing 
cost and the yield that can be earned by holding the underlying asset, and finally the cost 
of carry, approaches zero, when the delivery date approaches.   126 However, th e borrowing rate is usually higher than the lending rate. The impact of this 
difference is important when defining theoretical futures price.  
In the cash -and-carry trade, the theoretical futures price based on borrowing rate becomes  
Theoretical futures pri ce = Spot price + ( Spot price) ×(Borrowing rate -Cash yield)  
In the reverse cash -and-carry trade, the theoretical futures price based on lending rate 
becomes:  
Theoretical futures price = Spot price + ( Spot price)×(Lending rate - Cash yield)  
Both equations together provide a band between which the actual futures price can exist 
without allowing for an arbitrage profit. The first equation establishes the upper value for 
the band while the second equation provides the lower value for the band.  
The reverse cas h-and-strategy  trade requires the short selling of the underlying. It is 
assumed in this strategy that the proceeds from the short sale are received and reinvested. 
In practice, for individual investors, the proceeds are not received, and, in fact, the 
individual investor is required to deposit margin (securities margin and not futures margin) 
to short sell. For institutional investors, the underlying may be borrowed, but there is a cost 
to borrowing. This cost of borrowing can be incorporated into the mode l by reducing the 
cash yield on the underlying.  
For strategies applied to stock index futures, a short sale of the components stocks in the 
index means that all stocks in the index must be sold simultaneously. This may be difficult 
to do and therefore wou ld widen the band for the theoretical future price.  
For valuation of stock index futures the fair value premium is used.  
The excess of the fair futures price over the spot (i.e. actual) stock index is called the fair 
value premium. The formula for the fair  value premium is:  
FP = I x [{(r - y)/100} x{d/365}]  
where FP is the fair value premium,  I is the spot FTSE 100 Index, r is the interest rate, y is 
the expected percentage dividend yield on the index portfolio, and d is the number of days 
to maturity of t he futures contract.  
Exercise  
 Assume that the rate of interest on risk -free bank deposits 
were 2.5% p.a.. If money could be borrowed at the same rate 
of interest, estimate the price of a FTSE 100 futures contract 
which matures in four months on the basis  of a spot index of 
4000 and a zero expected rate of dividend yield on the FTSE 
100 portfolio. How would the answer change if the expected 
rate of dividend yield were 0.5% p.a. (while the other values 
were as before)?  
Short cash and carry involves selling  the borrowed stock and buying futures. In this case 
the excess of interest over dividends is a net inflow and this gain should be matched by 
having a guaranteed future purchase price that exceeds the spot sale price by the amount of 
this net inflow. The m oney from the stock sale is put on deposit. In the case of short 
selling, the borrower of the stock must pay sums equivalent to the dividends to the lender 
of the stock. The excess of interest over dividends is a net inflow that should be matched 
by a capi tal loss guaranteed by the futures price.  
Exercise  
 Assume a fund manager has 10000000 Euro for a futures 
fund. The fund has an investment horizon of one year. The 
FTSE 100 stands at 5000.The one -year interest rate is 4% and 
the expected rate of dividend yield on the FTSE 100 over the  127 coming year is 2%.The fund manager puts 10000000 Euro in 
a bank deposit and obtains market exposure by buying FTSE 
100 futures.  
a) How many futures contracts, with a one -year maturity, are 
required for a fund that has a 10000 000 Euro exposure to the 
FTSE 100?  
b) What is the fair futures price?  
c) What is the rate of capital gain on the fund if the FTSE 100 
rises by 6% over the year, and the futures price is initially at 
its fair level?  
d) What is the total return on the fund i f the FTSE 100 rises 
by 6% over the year?  
e) How would the answers to (a),(c), and (d) change if the 
futures contracts were to provide a market exposure of 
20000000 Euro (while the sum of money on deposit remains 
at 10000000 Euro)?  
f) Is it the case that t he whole of the 10000000 Euro can be 
kept in a bank deposit?  
 
Exercise  
 Assume that the FTSE 100 is 4500, the three -month interest 
rate is 3% p.a., and the expected rate of dividend  
yield on the FTSE 100 over the next three months is 2% p.a.  
a) What is t he fair price of a futures contract due to mature in 
three months?  
b) If financial institutions face transaction costs of 0,1% on 
both purchases and sales of stock, plus 0,2% tax on 
purchases, what is the no -arbitrage band of futures prices?  
c) If speculat ors expect that the FTSE 100 will be 4700 in 
three months from the present, what would you expect to 
happen in the futures and spot markets?  
 
6.3.3.  Use of forwards and futures  
Going long or short in futures market without any offsetting position is described a s taking 
a speculative position . 
In a futures hedge  an investor offsets a position in the cash (spot) market with a nearly 
opposite position in the futures market. The objective is to reduce the overall risk position. 
The hedged position has lower expected  return than an unhedged position.  
In a long hedge  the investor takes a long position in futures. In a short hedge  the investor 
takes a short position in futures. A very important type of hedge occurs when an investor 
with the long position in the spot ma rket simultaneously take a short position in the futures 
contracts.  
In short hedging the hedger may be able to find a futures contract for a virtually identical 
item as hedgers cash (spot) position. Then the gains (losses) in the spot market are offset 
by the gains (losses) in the futures market. This offset is shown in the figure  bellow.   128 Figure 15 . Profit profile for perfect hedge  
The Figure 15 provides profit profiles. Assume, the investor goes long in the  spot market 
at 50 Euro. As the spot price increases (decreases) the investor gains (loses) exactly the 
same amount. The profit profile for a spot position is offset exactly by t he short futures 
position. P rofit profile for the net position is a horizontal  line, indicating no change in the 
value of the net position a s the spot price changes. F lat profile represents a perfect hedge.   
However most often identical or similar future contracts do not exist. In this situation, the 
hedger must utilize a short pos ition in a similar, but different asset. This is called a cross 
hedge . The relationship between a spot position and a futures contract in a cross hedge is 
not a perfect straight line. It is shown as a dotted line in the figure below. Here it is 
assumed tha t the investor takes a long position in the spot market in grade A investment 
assets, and offsets by taking short position in the futures market in grade B investment 
assets. Grade B asset prices are assumed to move half as fast as grade A asset prices. Th e 
Figure 16 shows profit profile for long spot grade A investment assets, short futures grade 
B investment assets and the net position. The gains and losses on the spot position are cut 
in half for grade A investment assets by the sho rt hedge.  
 
Figure 16. Profit profile for a cross hedge  Short 
Futures  Long 
Spot 
Hedge  
        P  0 Profit  Loss  
Short Futures: 
Grade B  Long Grade A  
Hedge  
        P  Profit  Loss  Hedge  
0  129  
The hedger can estimate the slope of the line (β) by using r egression analysis in order to 
find the best -fitting relationship. For every unit of the spot asset (cash market),  the hedger 
shorts β units of the futures. β is called the optimal hedge ratio.  
Exercise  
 Assume a fund manager anticipates the receipt of 5 million 
Euro in one month. The intention is to invest the money 
equally between the three stocks X, Y, and Z. Thes e stocks 
have betas of 0,9, 1,1, and 1,3 respectively. The FTSE 100 is 
equal now to 8800.How can the fund manager hedge against 
a rise in stock prices using futures?  
The optimal hedge ratio is not a perfect hedge, because the link between the spot and 
futures is not perfect. The optimal hedge ratio is the best in the sense that the expected 
change in the hedged position is zero.  
6.3.4.  Futures contracts: stock index futures  
For stock index futures the deliverable commodity (underlying asset) is a common stock 
index. Some stock index futures are actively traded contracts.  
The stock index future price depends upon the value of the stocks in the index, the 
dividends on these stocks, and the interest rate until the delivery date on the futures 
contract.  
Arbitrage en sures that the futures contract should be equivalent of a buying the stock in the 
index, borrowing the funds for this purchase, paying interest on the borrowed funds at the 
delivery date, and receiving any dividends.  
F stock = P stock ( 1 + r d ) d – Div 
when  P stock - is the current market value of stocks in the index, r – the spot interest rate 
from now until delivery date, Div – amount of dividends on these stocks.  
Unless the futures price is equal to P stock ( 1 + r d ) d – Div, arbitrage occurs. This a rbitrage 
is called program trading. The figure below illustrates the case, when the futures price is 
above P stock ( 1 + r d ) d – Div.  
Figure 17. Program trading arbitrage  Actual futures  Arbitrage profit  
Theoretical futures  
Spot price  
Time  Price   130  
This arbitrage is to take short position in futures and b uy the stocks in the index. The 
arbitrage position is held until the futures and spot prices are once more in line. Both 
positions are closed for profit.  
Such type of arbitrage involves the purchase and sale of large number of stocks in the 
index. In orde r to uncover the arbitrage opportunity initially, a computer program is 
needed. Afterwards, the buy or sell orders for a large number of stocks must be executed 
rapidly by computer program before the arbitrage profit opportunity disappears.  
 
6.3.5.  Contracts for difference (CFD)  
A contract for difference (CFD) is an instrument that has similarities with a futures 
contract. Frequently it is related to a particular stock, but could relate to any marketable 
asset (or even non -marketable instruments such as stock indi ces).  
CFD contracts do not have fixed expiry dates and can be closed at any time. A CFD is a 
deal between an investor and a broker. The investor is expected to pay a deposit (typically 
10% of the value of the shareholding to which the CFD is related). If l osses are made from 
the transaction, the broker takes cash from the deposit (margin) and the investor is required 
to provide more cash in order to maintain the value of the deposit at 10%. If the position 
makes a profit, the investor receives cash.  
An inve stor who takes a long position in a CFD relating to a share would profit from a 
share price rise, and lose in the event of a share price fall. The profits or losses would be 
calculated by reference to a specified share price (typically slightly above the s hare price 
when the contract was entered into; the offer price of the share might be used). If the share 
price were above the specified price, there would be a profit equal to the difference 
between the current price and the specified price.  
Conversely, t here would be a loss equal to the extent to which the current stock price is 
below the specified price. An investor with a long CFD is treated as if the shares are 
bought with borrowed money and the broker can do in the absence of offsetting short 
position s. The investor pays interest and receives dividends.  
An investor who takes a short position in a CFD profits from price falls and loses from 
price rises. The extent of profit or loss is based on the difference between the current share 
price and a share p rice slightly below the share price at the time that the contract was 
entered into. The bid price of the share might be used also.  
An investor with a short CFD is treated as if the shares are sold short and the receipts are 
put on deposit. The investor re ceives interest and pays sums equal to the share dividends. 
Bid/offer prices might be quoted.  
Potential losses are very large in the event of prices moving heavily against the 
anticipations of an investor. The use of stop -loss order ensures automatic closu re of a 
position in the event of a price movement beyond a particular level. However, there is a 
risk that the price movement is so rapid, that closure occurs only after the price has moved 
significantly beyond the chosen stop -loss price.  
A broker, who is providing CFDs, can take corresponding positions in the share. However 
if a broker has investors on both the long and short sides, the need to take positions in the 
share is reduced since the cash flows of long and short investors would match each other. 
Some concern has been expressed that if investors use CFDs as a substitute for share 
purchases, liquidity is taken from the stock market. Although brokers take offsetting  131 positions in the stock market, liquidity is reduced to the extent that there is matchi ng 
between long and short positions.  
By using CFDs investors can obtain leveraged investments or short positions on a share (or 
other instrument).An almost identical alternative to CFDs is spread betting.  
 
6.4. Swaps  
A swap  is an agreement whereby two parties ( called counterparties ) agree to exchange 
periodic payments. The cash amount of the payments exchanged is based on some 
predetermined principal amount, which is called the notional principal amount  or simply 
notional amount . The cash amount each counterpart y pays to the other is the agreed -upon 
periodic rate times the notional amount. The only cash that is exchanged between the 
parties are the agreed -upon payments, not the notional amount.  
A swap is an over -the-counter (OTC) contract. Hence, the counterpart ies to a swap are 
exposed to counterparty risk . 
Swap can be decomposed into a package of derivative instruments, e.g. a package of 
forward contracts. However, its maturity can be longer than that of typical  forward and 
futures contracts, it is negotiated separately, can have quite high liquidity (larger than 
many forward contracts, particularly long -dated (i.e., long -term) forward contracts).  
The types of swaps typically used by non -finance corporations are:  
 interest rate swaps,  
 currency swaps,  
 commodity  swaps, and  
 credit default swaps.  
Interest rate swap  is a contract in which the counterparties swap payments in the same 
currency based on an interest rate. For example, one of the counterparties can pay a fixed 
interest rate and the other party a floati ng interest rate. The floating interest rate is 
commonly referred to as the reference rate . 
Currency swap  is a contract, in which two parties agree to swap payments based on 
different currencies.  
Commodity swap is a contract, according to which the exchang e of payments by the 
counterparties is based on the value of a particular physical commodity. Physical 
commodities include precious metals, base metals, natural gas, crude oil, food.  
A credit default swap  (CDS)  is an OTC derivative that permits the buying and selling of 
credit protection against particular types of events that can adversely affect the credit 
quality of a bond such as the default of the borrower.  
Although it is referred to as a “swap,” it does not have the general characteristics of a 
typica l swap. There are two parties in the CDS contract: the credit protection buyer and 
credit protection seller . Over the life of the CDS, the protection buyer agrees to pay the 
protection seller a payment at specified dates to insure against the impairment of  the debt 
of a reference entity due to a credit -related event. The reference entity is a specific issuer. 
The specific credit -related events are identified in the contract that will trigger a payment 
by the credit protection seller to the credit protection  buyer are referred to as credit events . 
If a credit event does occur, the credit protection buyer only makes a payment up to the 
credit event date and makes no further payment. At this time, the protection buyer is  132 obligated to fulfill its obligation. The  contract will call for the protection seller to 
compensate for the loss in the value of the debt obligation  
 
6.5. Options  
6.5.1.  Options definition  
An option  is a contract in which the option seller grants the option buyer the right to enter 
into a transaction with t he seller to either buy or sell an underlying asset at a specified 
price on or before a specified date.  
Options, like other financial instruments, may be traded either on an organized exchange 
or in the over -the-counter (OTC) market.  
The specified price i s called the strike price  or exercise price  and the specified date is 
called the expiration date .  
The option seller grants this right in exchange for a certain amount of money called the 
option premium or option price. The option seller is also known as t he option writer, while 
the option buyer is the option holder.  
The asset that is the subject of the option is called the underlying . The underlying can be 
an individual stock, a stock index, a bond, or even another derivative instrument such as a 
futures contract.  
The option writer can grant the option holder one of two rights. If the right is to purchase 
the underlying, the option is a call option . If the right is to sell the underlying, the option 
is a put option . 
.Concept  
 Call options: Options that g ive the right to buy a given 
amount of a financial instrument or commodity at an agreed 
price within a specified time but, like all options, do not 
oblige investors to do so.  
 
Concept  
 Put options: Options that give the right to sell a given 
amount of a financial instrument or commodity at an agreed 
price within a specified time, but that do not oblige investors 
to do so.  
An option can also be categorized according to when it may be exercised by the buyer or 
the exercise style:  
 European option can only b e exercised at the expiration date of the contract.  
 American option  can be exercised any time on or before the expiration date.  
 Bermuda option or Atlantic option – is an option which can be exercised 
before the expiration date but only on specified dates  is called . 
The terms of exchange are represented by the contract unit and are standardized for most 
contracts. The option holder enters into the contract with an opening transaction. 
Subsequently, the option holder then has the choice to exercise or to se ll the option. The 
sale of an existing option by the holder is a closing sale.  
A profit profile for a call option is provided in the figure bellow. Suppose an investor is 
buying a bond, which is currently selling at its exercise price of 100 Euro, and hol ds this 
bond for three months until the option expires. Possible profits or losses will be on the 
solid line. If a call option costs 4 Euro, this will be the maximum loss for a call option  133 buyer. If the bond price at expiration is above the exercise, the p rofit equals P – E – 4 
Euro.  
 
Figure 18. Profit profiles for a call option  
The maximum profit that the option writer can realize is the option price. The option buyer 
has substantial upside return potential, while the option write r has substantial downside 
risk.  
The described call option is called a naked call option. This is a risky position because the 
potential of loss is unbound.  
Another less risky contract is writing a covered call. Such a contract involves the purchase 
of the underlying security and the writing of a call option on that security.  Profit profile 
for the covered call is shown in the  Figure 19.  If a call option is profitable, then it it is 
exercised and the covered call writer must sell t he underlying security at the exercise price 
(100 Euro). The maximum gain is 4 Euro, i.e. the original sale price of the call option. If 
the call option is unprofitable, the covered call option writer receives 4 Euro for writing 
the call, and this reduces the loss from owning the underlying security.  
The purchase of a call option creates a position referred to as a long call position . 
The writer of a call option is said to be in a short call position . 
The buying of a put option  creates a financial position referred to as a long put position .  
The profit or loss for this position at the expiration date depends on the market price of the 
underlying asset. As with all long option positions, the loss is limited to the option price. 
The profit potential, however,  is substantial: The theoretical maximum profit is generated 
if asset’s  price falls to zero.  
Writing a put option  creates a position referred to as a short put position . The profit and 
loss profile for a short put option is the opposite of the long put o ption. The maximum 
profit from this position is the option price.  100 
E 104 Write call  Buy call  Buy 
underlying 
security  
Underlying 
asset at 
expiration  Profit  
+ 4 
0 
 
Loss   134  
Figure 19. Profit profile for writing a covered call option  
 
The theoretical maximum loss can be substantial, if the price of the underlying falls. If the 
price fa lls to zero, the loss would be as large as the exercise price less the option price. 
Figure 20graphically shows this profit and loss profile.  
 
 
Figure 20. Profit profile for a put option  E Write covered 
call Buy underlying 
security  
Underlying asset 
at expiration  Profit  
Loss  0 C ● 
Profit  
Buy 
put 
Loss  –  pp  ● 97 100 
E Underlying 
asset at 
expira tion 
   135 To summarize, buying calls or selling puts allows the investor to gain if the price of the 
underlying asset rises. Selling calls and buying puts allows the investor to gain if the price 
of the underlying asset falls.  
 
6.5.2.  Components of the Option Price  
The theoretical price of an option is made up of two components:  
 intrinsic value;  
 premium over intrinsic value.  
The intrinsic value is the option’s economic value if it is exercised immediately. If no 
positive economic value would result from exercising immediately, the intrinsic va lue is 
zero.  
For a call option, the intrinsic value is the difference between the current market price of 
the underlying and the strike price. If that difference is positive, then the intrinsic value 
equals that difference; if the difference is zero or ne gative, then the intrinsic value is equal 
to zero.  
Concept  Intrinsic value of an option: The profit available from 
immediately exercising an option. Where the value of the 
right granted by the option is equal to the market value of the 
underlying instrum ent (the intrinsic value is zero), the option 
is said to be at-the-money.  If the intrinsic value is positive, 
the option is in-the-money . If exercising an option would 
produce a loss, it is out-of-the-money.  
For a put option, the intrinsic value is equal to the amount by which the underlying’s 
market price is below the strike price.  
Time premium  of an option, or time value of the option , is the amount by which the 
option’s market price exceeds its intrinsic value. It is the expectation of the option buyer  
that at some time before the expiration date the changes in the market price of the 
underlying asset will increase the value of the rights of the option. Because of this 
expectation, the option buyer is willing to pay a premium above the intrinsic value.  
An option buyer has two ways to realize the value of an option position.  
The first way is by exercising the option. The second way is to sell the option in the 
market.  
Put-Call Parity Relationship.  For a European put and a European call option with the 
same underlying,  strike price, and expiration date, there is a relationship between the price 
of a call option, the price of a put option, the price of the underlying, and the strike price. 
This relationship is known as the put-call parity relationship .  
The relationship is equal to:  
Put option price − Call option price = Present value of strike price + Present value of cash 
distribution − Price of underlying asset  
Put-call parity implies that:  
Call option price >= Put option price - Lending present value of exercise price  
The value Put option price - Lending present value of exercise price  has been called 
Merton’s lower bound . It follows that the cash flows from buying a call option can never 
be less than buying the underlying security and borrowing the underlying value of the  136 exercis e price. Merton’s bound is illustrated in the   Figure 21. As the price of the 
underlying asset rises, the value of the call approaches Merton’s bound, and consequently, 
the value of a put gets very small. When the price of the underl ying asset is small, the 
value of the call option is small, and the value of a put becomes large.  
  Figure 21. Merton‘s bound  
 
6.5.3.  Determinants of the Option Price  
The factors that affect the price of an option include:  
 Market price o f the underlying asset.  
 Strike (exercise) price of the option.  
 Time to expiration of the option.  
 Expected volatility of the underlying asset over the life of the option.  
 Short -term, risk -free interest rate over the life of the option.  
 Anticipated cash paym ents on the underlying over the life of the option.  
The impact of each of these factors may depend on whether (1) the option is a call or a put, 
and (2) the option is an American option or a European option.  
Market price of the underlying asset.  The optio n price will change as the price of the 
underlying asset changes. For a call option, as the underlying assets’s price increases (all 
other factors being constant), the option price increases. The opposite holds for a put 
option, i.e. as the price of the un derlying increases, the price of a put option decreases.  
Exercise (strike) price  Shortsell  
Call price  
Price of 
underlying 
asset  
E $ 
Merton’s bound: P – ED  
  137 The exercise price is fixed for the life of the option. All other factors being equal, the 
lower the exercise price, the higher the price for a call option. For put options, the higher 
the exercise price, the higher the option price.  
Time to expiration of the option.  After the expiration date, an option has no value. All 
other factors being equal, the longer the time to expiration of the option, the higher the 
option price. Th is is because, as the time to expiration decreases, less time remains for the 
underlying asset’s price to rise (for a call buyer) or fall (for a put buyer), and therefore the 
probability of a favorable price movement decreases. Consequently, as the time re maining 
until expiration decreases, the option price approaches its intrinsic value. The impact of 
longer remaining life is shown in Figure 22 
Figure 22. Impact of longer remaining life on the value of a call  option  
 
 
Figure 23. Impact of the volatility of the underlying asset on the value of a call option  
 C2 has a longer life than C 1 
Merton’s bound is higher 
for C 2 because D 2 < D 1  C  
P C2 P – ED 2  
P – E 
C1 P – ED 1  
E 
C2 
P 
E C 
P – ED  
C1 C2 has greater volatility of 
underlying asset  
P – E   138 Expected Volatility of the Underlying  asset over the life of the option.  All other factors 
being equal, the greater the expecte d volatility (as measured by the standard deviation or 
variance) of the underlying, the more the option buyer would be willing to pay for the 
option, and the more an option writer would demand for it. This occurs because the greater 
the expected volatility , the greater the probability that the movement of the underlying will 
change so as to benefit the option buyer at some time before expiration.  
Figure 24. Impact of higher interest rate on value of call option  
Short -term, risk -free interest rate  over the life of the option. Buying the underlying 
asset requires an investment of funds. Buying an option on the same quantity of the 
underlying makes the difference between the underlying’s price and the option price 
available for investme nt at an interest rate at least as high as the risk -free rate. 
Consequently, all other factors being constant, the higher the short -term, risk -free interest 
rate, the greater the cost of buying the underlying asset and carrying it to the expiration 
date of  the call option. Hence, the higher the short -term, risk -free interest rate, the more 
attractive the call option will be relative to the direct purchase of the underlying. As a 
result, the higher the short -term, risk -free interest rate, the greater the pri ce of a call option.  
Anticipated cash payments on the underlying  over the life of the option cash payments 
on the underlying tend to decrease the price of a call option. The cash payments make it 
more attractive to hold the underlying than to hold the opt ion. For put options, cash 
payments on the underlying tend to increase the price.  
 
6.5.4.  Option pricing models  
An option pricing model uses a set of assumptions and arbitrage arguments to derive a 
theoretical price for an option. Deriving a theoretical option pr ice is much more 
complicated than deriving a theoretical futures or forward price because the option price 
depends on the expected volatility of the underlying over the life of the option.  
Several models have been developed to determine the theoretical pr ice of an option. The 
most popular one was developed by Fischer Black and Myron Scholes (1973) for valuing 
European call options on common stock.  
 C’ 
C C 
P C’ has a higher interest rate  P – ED’  
P – ED 
P – E  139 6.5.5.  Mixed strategies in options trading  
Call and put options and the buying and writing of options can be combin ed to try to profit 
from expected conditions in the market. Some of such strategies are as follows:  
Cases where a trader either buys or writes options but does not do both  
Straddle – a call and a put at the same strike price and expiry date  
Strangle – a call and a put for the same expiry date but at different strike prices  
Strap – two calls and one put with the same expiry dates; the strike prices might be the 
same or different  
Strip – two puts and one call with the same expiry date; again strike prices mig ht be the 
same or different  
In general, the buyer of these options is hoping for market prices to move sharply but is 
uncertain whether they will rise or fall. The buyer of a strap gains more from a price rise 
than from a price fall; the buyer of a strip g ains more from a price fall. The writer in all 
four cases is hoping that the market will remain stable, with little change in price during 
the life of the option.  
Spreads: combinations of buying and writing options  
Butterfly – buying two call options, one with a low exercise price, the other with a high 
exercise price, and writing two call options with the same intermediate strike price or the 
reverse.  
Condor – similar to a butterfly, except that the call options which are written have 
different intermediat e prices.  
Both a butterfly and a condor are vertical spreads – all options bought or sold have the 
same expiry date but different strike prices. Horizontal spreads have the same strike prices 
but different expiry dates. With diagonal spreads both the strik e prices and the expiry dates 
are different. Other mixed strategies have equally improbable names. They include vertical 
bull call; vertical bull spread; vertical bear spread; rotated vertical bull spread; rotated 
vertical bear spread.  
 
6.6. Summary  
The need fo r sophisticated risk management in the face of highly volatile exchange rates 
provides one of the principal reasons for the growth of derivatives markets. These allow 
firms to hedge risk by taking out contracts in derivatives markets, which carry the oppos ite 
risk to that which they face in the underlying markets. The principal types of derivatives 
are futures, forwards, swaps and options. Futures promise the delivery of an underlying 
asset of a specified kind on a given date, although delivery is seldom ma de. 
Options give the right to buy and/or sell an underlying asset, although that right need not 
be taken up. In order to increase tradability, futures and options are highly standardised. 
Both offer the possibility of very high rates of profit. Futures do this through the system of 
margin payments. In the case of options, this occurs because buyers of options pay only 
the premium for the right to trade at the specified price.  
Derivative contracts are offered in relation to exchange rates, short -term and lon g-term 
interest rates and stock exchange indices. They are widely used for speculation as well as 
for risk management. In recent years, options have become extremely complicated, with 
new forms of options contracts appearing regularly.   140 Forward and futures  contracts are likely to provide cheaper protection against loss than 
options, but remove the profit opportunity if prices move in favour of the firm. Thus, 
options are generally preferable if the hedger is uncertain about the direction the price of 
the un derlying asset is likely to move. A hedger who is confident about the direction in 
which the price will move is more likely to choose forward or futures contracts or remain 
in an open position and accept the risk of a price change.  
A trader who is confide nt that the price will fall may (a) sell the product before the price 
falls; (b) take an offsetting short position by selling futures contracts; or (c) sell the 
currency forwards. This eliminates entirely her exposure to the price fall.  
A trader who is un certain in which direction the price will move may choose options. Even 
then, if she thinks that the price is more likely to fall than to rise, financial futures are 
preferable to options because they are likely to offer her cheaper protection. Options are  
preferable if the trader has no view or thinks that the price is more likely to rise than fall.  
Derivatives markets have been controversial in recent years. Many companies have 
experienced losses badly in these markets, and fears about causing serious pro blems for 
the international financial system  continue to be widespread  
Key terms  
 Options  
 Futures  
 Forwards  
 Swaps  
Review questions and problems  
1. Consider the relative advantages and disadvantages of using forward contracts, 
futures contracts and options as m eans of speculation.  
2.  How do futures markets seek to protect themselves and their clients against 
default risk?  
3. Why might the increased protection provided to individual traders by the 
derivatives markets increase the risk of the whole financial system run ning into 
difficulties?  
4. Why did the US central bank (the Federal Reserve) feel the need to rescue a 
privately owned and run hedge fund (LTCM) in late 1998? Should public 
resources be used in this way?  
5.  How many ways are there of a Latvian investor going sh ort in US dollars or 
giving itself the opportunity of going short? Why might a Latvian investor wish 
to go short in US dollars?  
6. Why is it more risky to write (sell) options contracts than to buy them?  
7. Consider the following statement: A speculator who felt  that interest rates were 
likely to rise or a currency’s value decline would go short in the relevant asset 
by selling a futures contract.  
a) Why would a speculator go short rather than long in these two cases?  
b) What does going short in interest rates me an? 
c) How does selling a futures contract allow one to go short?  
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Capital Market Authority
Financial Investments
and Stock Markets
Introduction
When the career life of an individual begins, a continuous income begins with it. This income is spent 
on basic needs and over time it will increase. Subsequently, the ability to save and place these savings in investments will generate more revenues and maintain the purchasing power of the individual’s money which might fall back with the increase in prices. This is where the need for how to place these savings in investment vehicles increases to help the individual in achieving his life objectives.2Unit One: Introduction
The cycle of one’s life starts by completing his edu-
cation and entering the work stage where he re-ceives revenue or an income from his work in the form of salary or wage. It is normal for a person to split his income between consumption and saving. Usually, an individual spends most of his in-come on his consumption needs such as food, cloth-ing, accommodation, a car, educational, health and entertainment services …etc. After meeting those needs,  the remainder is accumulated and saved. At 
the beginning of a career, the income is usually low. Over time, the income improves and the individual gradually begins to increase 
his savings and employ them in various areas in or -
der to increase his income more and more.
As the individual’s savings increase, his wealth starts 
to grow. Wealth is defined as the accumulated sav-ings. The individual seeks to place wealth in invest-ments which include tangible and financial assets 
that bring him greater revenues and income and guarantee that his money purchasing power will be maintained and will not fall back when the prices rise. Tangible investment assets include real estate, lands, goods and others. Financial assets, on the other hand, include deposits in banks, mutual funds, stocks, bonds, foreign currency and others. These investments generate more revenues added to the individual’s income which he in turn utilizes to sup-port any future consumption.
An individual diversifies his investments and balance 
them to ensure achieving his objectives. His short-
term goal (up to one year) can be buying a car, an apartment or starting  a small family.  In medium term (one year up to five years), goals might change into starting a family, raising children well, educat-
Income is return from 
work and property owned by an indi-vidual.
Purchasing power is the capacity 
of income and money to buy and own goods and services. If prices increase, the individual’s ability to buy decreases. Thus, money and revenues lose part of their value.  
work
Income Consumption
saving
Wealth: Financial as-
sets (stocks, bonds, 
deposits in banks,…
etc)Wealth:Tangible 
assets (real estate, 
gold, goods,..etc)3ing them and starting a private business or a small 
enterprise which could increase the individual’s in-come. In the long term, things could change into planning for post retirement to ensure a decent life for him and his family and to leave adequate inheri-tance for those left behind after his death.
A person should employ his wealth to achieve 
his goals through appropriate investments that go in line with the capital he has to secure the high-est possible return for himself .In investment, it is known that the higher risk,  the higher the returns and profits. On the other hand, the lower the risk, the lower the returns and profits. However, individ-uals handle risk differently. Some risk their money in hope for making high and quick profits while oth-ers tend to avoid risk and prefer safety and caution in their investments. In addition, individuals differ in their ability of being patient and waiting to experi-ence lower returns, increasing risks or losses that may happen in the short term. T o reduce investment risks as much as possible, one should diversify his investments in financial and tangible assets that have 
already been mentioned previously. This concept can be reflected by the saying: “Do not put all your eggs in one basket”.
Unit Two: The Financial Mar -
ket 
Members of the society can be economically classi-fied into two groups: Individual investors and savers. Individual investors are those who have the desire to create companies and institutions, and estab-lish different projects, but they may not have the sufficient funds to do so. Individual savers, on the other hand, are those who have the money, but do not have the desire, knowledge or ability to invest it by themselves. Usually, savers belong to different classes of society such as workers, employees and retirees who can save part of their income. Inves-tors tend to use their saved funds to help them to establish companies. 
They divide corporate capital into stakes or portions 
where each portion is known as a share. They offer these shares for sale as each saver buys a number of those shares within the limits of his savings. This makes him a shareholder and a participant in the company’s capital. Therefore, he becomes a part of 
4its management and decisions according to his stake 
in the company’s capital. In other cases, investors do not wish to share the management and decision making of the company with the savers. Therefore, they tend to get the savers’ money through bor -
rowing, then dividing what they need of their corpo-rate funds into portions, known as bonds or  sukuk. Savers buy these bonds within the limits of what they want and how much savings they have. In fact, they do this in anticipation for returns from  holding these bonds, and then redeeming their value when their maturity is due.
2-1 Definitions
The Financial Market: a market where securities are traded (sold and bought).
Securities include: stocks, bonds and also currency 
trading. According to this, financial markets are di-vided into stock markets, bond markets and curren-
cy markets. Stocks are ownership instruments to a part of the issuer’s   capital, while bonds are con-sidered debt instruments on the entity that issued them. When you purchase a stock, you become a participant or a shareholder in the company. On the other hand, if you purchase a bond, you become a creditor to this company. Savers purchase stocks for two reasons: first, to obtain part of the profits gen-erated by the company. This is known as dividends.Second, the prices of these stocks may go up due to higher demand as a result of the company’s growth and the increase in its earnings. Thus, the value of stocks owned by the investor increases. This is known as the capital gain. 
Stocks are bought and sold on the market in a regu-
lated and legal manner so dealers do not lose their 
5rights. Usually, all these operations are made through 
financial brokerage firms that are authorized by a market regulator, which is the Capital Market Au-thority (CMA) in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
There are various types of stocks which are traded 
on the market. There are stocks that give their hold-er the right to attend the general assembly of the company and express his opinion on the way the company is managed. 
There are also bonus stocks: they are  free shares 
granted to the owners of ordinary stocks in order to increase what they own in the company  and to increase the company’s capital as well. 
As for preferred stocks, they give their owner the 
right and priority to obtain his rights from the com-pany.
There are two main types of stock markets: the pri-
mary market and the secondary market. The Primary Market:  a market where stocks are 
issued, that is when a company is established and 
offers its stocks to the dealers for the first time, or when the capital of an existing company is raised. When these stocks are listed in the market, the first buyer of the stock can sell it on a trading market, which is known as the secondary market. In other words, stocks are first issued and sold in the pri-mary market, and then traded (bought and sold) in the secondary market.
2-2 Functions of Financial Market:  
Financial markets in general, and stock markets in particular, have great importance given their multi-ple functions in serving the national economy. These services include the following: 
• Saving Encouragement: by providing fields to 
employ or invest funds, especially for those whom their income is higher than their ex-penses, and do not have enough time to pay at-tention to  investment projects they want to start. Therefore, investing in the stock market provides good investment opportunities that encourage savers to increase their savings, take advantage of investment opportunities in the market and provide adequate capital for com-
Stocks of new and existing companies, that aim to 
raise their capital, are offered for subscription through local banks in the kingdom. The total number of offered stocks, their ratio to company capital, stock price, subscription maximum limit, and duration are determined in an IPO. , Savers take interest in IPOs to buy shares on the primary market for the profits they expect to generate from selling stocks on the secondary market eventually.6panies to make investments and sustain their 
business.
• Risk mitigation: investing in the stock market 
reduces the risks of losing savings and money if the saver himself invested them in other areas where he does not have enough experience. In addition, one of the investment risks, inadequate liquidity, can be eliminated because the investor can sell his shares easily and quickly. He can also liquidate them whenever money is needed. 
• Increase economic growth; financing projects 
and investments listed in the stock market con-tributes to producing more goods and services and supporting economic growth. This leads to an increase in career opportunities for job seekers.
In addition, selecting shares of stocks in specific 
projects and companies contributes to steering the money and savings towards more feasible and prof-itable projects. 2-3  Characteristics of Financial Markets:  
In general, financial markets have a number of dis-
tinct characteristics that distinguish them from oth-er traditional markets like commodity or real estate markets and others. The sale and purchase in tra-ditional markets is available for goods and services in a physical tangible way plus they give benefits to those who consume them. In securities markets, however, there is no need to have tangible Sukuk or securities…etc  because the operations are car -
ried out through computer networks. Furthermore, securities like bonds and stocks are not consumed by themselves but rather used to get returns and profits generated from investments. Daily transac-tions in financial markets are enormous compared to other markets . They can exceed billions in finan-cial markets, while they cannot go beyond millions in other markets. The law sometimes requires dealers in the securities market to buy and sell through a fi-nancial broker. In traditional markets, however, there is no obligation to use the services of a broker.
Wealth: Financial as-
sets (stocks, bonds, deposits in banks,…etc).Wealth: Tangible as-sets (real estate, gold, goods,..etc)
Stock market72-4  Efficiency of Financial Markets 
The efficiency of financial markets means that the 
price of a security (stock or bond) is determined according to all the available information about the economy, sectors and companies issuing that security. Financial markets are efficient if the pric-es of stocks and traded securities are determined correctly. The right price of a security, whether it was a stock or a bond, is the one that reflects all the available information in a timely manner about that security. In order to say that a financial mar -
ket is efficient, it must have several features. For example, all the important information to judge a stock or bond and determine their right price should be available for all dealers. A good example of this, is the information about companies and their profitability, changes in management or the information about competitors, the contracts they made and other information affecting the 
purchasing and selling decisions. Moreover, deal-ers should have the ability to obtain proper analy-ses of the received information to help in judging the right price for the stocks or bonds . Sellers and buyers should not have – due to their high fi-nancial capacity - the ability to influence the right market prices upwards or downwards or impose restrictions on the freedom of selling and pur -
chasing for any trader at anytime.
2-5  Basic Concepts: Nominal Value, Book 
Value and Market Value :
An investor wanted to establish a plastic com-
pany. After  studying the project’s cost, he found out that the company’s capital must be ten mil-lion Riyals. Since he does not have this amount, he turned to the savers’ money to participate in co-founding the company. Due to the large amount of capital required, he divided it into mil-lion shares. Each is worth 10 Riyals. The ten Riyals in this case are known as the share nominal value . Because the expected profitability of the project is  high, a growing number of savers accepted to contribute to this project and purchase the is-sued stocks. The required capital was raised and the company was established. At the end of the 
8first year, the company have generated a profit of 
two million Riyals, i.e. two Riyals profit per share of the company’s shares. The corporate manage-ment met to decide one of the following options: Distribute profits to shareholders, distribute part of the profits and keep the remaining, or do not distribute the profits of this year at all. Of course, when the decision is to keep the profit or part of it, the retained earnings are used in financing the company’s expansions and investments or in making provisions and reserves to face any emer -
gencies. If the distribution is not made, the value of the company assets in this case will be twelve million Riyals. This includes plots, buildings, ma-chinery, equipment, production supplies available in the company, its money in treasury and in  bank accounts, etc… . When the company’s assets in-crease to twelve million Riyals, the book value of a single share becomes twelve Riyals. (12 million Riyals ÷ one million stocks = 12 Riyals).
Nominal Value:  The share value when the company is established.
Book Value: What shareholders expect to receive if the company were liquidated. The book value can be 
calculated by dividing the company’s assets by the number of shares.Provisions:  Amounts of profit that are retained or cut off from the company’s revenue to be disposed of in one of the specific aspects of actual expenditures (such as buying new machinery or plots to expand the company) or for potential emergency expenditures (such as fire, higher production costs, or decreased company earnings).Earnings Per Share: Profits that are allocated to each share. It is not conditional  that earnings should be in cash.  They can be bonus shares distributed to shareholders. These profits, or even bonus shares, may also not be distributed, but rather reinvested and consequently the market value of the company’s shares increases.Total Return on Stock:  return on the stock plus capital gain.9The company has evolved, the work expanded and 
the number of costumers has increased. At the end of the second year, its stocks were floated in an IPO in the stock market at a price of fifteen Riyals. Due to the good reputation of the company, the market price of the stock has risen to twenty five Riyals on the first tradingDay. In other words, the market  value of each share rose by ten Riyals from the offering price.
Unit Three: International 
Stock Markets
Newspaper and media headlines are full of news 
about international stock markets. As they say: the world has become globalized where the news is spread between its parties easily and simply. The 
most important news to be published about these markets is the performance indexes which we will define its concept then review some of the interna-tional and regional indexes as the following: 
3-1 Stock Market Index :
A number that summarizes the price movement of all stocks listed in a market and usually represents the average of those prices. Stocks are not equal in their percentage representation of the index. Rep-resenting a company’s stock depends on its weight in the market measured by the market value of the company divided by the market value of all listed companies in the market. Stock prices rise and fall due to supply and demand. When the demand for some corporate stock exceeds the supply, the price of this stock rises and subsequently the market in-Market value:  the value of the share in the market. It is 
affected by the supply ( the number of stocks available to investors) and the demand ( the number of stocks investors wish to buy). The investor can know the market value of a share through the Saudi Stock Exchange (Tadawul) website in addition to other means of mass media. Market Capitalization: it is calculated by multiplying  the number of a company’s  stocks by the current market price of the stock.
10A country has created a stock market; three compa -
nies offered their stocks for initial sale in each case 
for a price of 100 Riyals per stock. For clarification purposes, the index of the stock market prices (in this case) is calculated by taking the (simple) average of the prices. That is done by adding up the prices of all the three stocks (100+100+100) then dividing them by the number of companies that issued them (3) to get the index in what is known as the base year (beginning year) and it is 100.
With the start of trading in stocks and with the end 
of the first period, the share price of the first com-pany rose to 120 Riyals while the share price of the second company fell to 95 Riyals. The share price of the third company remained unchanged (100 Ri-yals). By repeating  the calculation of the index value by taking the (simple) average of the new prices, we get [÷(120+95+100)/3] = 315/3=105 ; which means that the index has risen by 5 points at the end of the first trading period. 
The rate of change in the index (Market Return) is 
calculated according to the following rule : Rate of change = [(current index value – previous index value ) ÷ previous index value] ×100%In the example above, the calculations are as fol-lows:Rate of change = (105 - 100) ÷ 100×100%=5%Which means that the stock prices in this market increased by 5% between the two periods.It should be noted that this is a simplified calculation method intended for clarification purposes But, the actually applied method  is different  as better statis-tical and mathematical methods are used.dex increases with the percentage represented by 
this stock in the index.
3-2 The Importance of the Index: 
The stock market index reflects the condition of the national economy in general and the economic performance of listed companies in the market in particular. If the demand for the companies’ produc-tion increased due to the economic boost, then the sales and earnings of these companies are expected to increase as well as their dividends to sharehold-ers, which in turn pushes the prices of their stocks up and the whole market index. In this case, the market index turns green. However, if the perfor -
mance in the market declines, the indicator changes its color to red.
3-3 Some of the Global Indexes:  
Global financial markets have two types of in-dexes: General indexes  that measure the mar -
ket situation in general, and sector indexes that measure the market situation according to a par -
ticular sector such as banking, industrial, agricul-tural,  communications and other sectors.  In the following points we address the most important international and regional indexes. 113-3-1 U.S. Market Indexes: 
• DOW Jones: is a major index that consists 
of four sub-indexes and the most famous of 
which is the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The value of the index is calculated based on the stocks of the thirty largest industrial com-panies in the United States of America. 
• Standard and Poor’s 500 (S&P 500): It com-
prises the stocks of the leading five hundred companies in several areas, including: manufac-turing, transportation, utilities, money,  bank-ing, insurance, technology and services. These companies represent approximately 80% of the market value of shares traded on the New Y ork Stock Exchange. 
• NASDAQ: is the largest among all U.S. indexes. 
It contains the stocks of 3,200 companies, mostly technological.3-3-2 European Market Indexes :
• United Kingdom :
Financial Times 100: (FT -100) this index in-cludes the 100 most important UK compa-nies’ stocks in the London market, repre-senting 70% of the total capital of registered companies.
• France
CAC 40: this index includes the stocks of the forty most important French companies in Paris market. 
• Germany
DAX: this index contains  the stocks of the 30 most significant companies, representing 70% of the market value of the companies regis-tered in Frankfurt market.
3-3-3  Asian Market Indexes :
• - Japan 
Nikkei Index : contains the stocks of 225 com-
12panies,  representing about 70% of the market 
value of the companies registered in the T okyo Stock Exchange. 
• Other Asian Indexes :
1. South K orea: KCS Index2.
 Hong K
ong : HANG SENG Index
3.
 Ma
laysia: KLSE Index 
4.
 China :
 Shanghai Index
3-3-4 Arab Market Indexes:
Arab stock market are emerging markets due to the great potential of economic growth in Arab countries.  The Saudi stock exchange is considered the most significant market in all Arab countries. It represents about one third of the capital value of all Arab markets  combined. In addition to Saudi Arabia, there is a number of other important Arab financial markets such as :
• The United Arab Emirates: (Dubai and Abu Dhabi markets ).
• Oman: MSM   • Kuwait: KSE
• Egypt: CMA   • Bahrain:  BSE 
• Morocco:  MASI  • Qatar: CBQUnit Four: The Saudi Stock Ex-
change
4-1 Historical Background
The Saudi stock exchange is one of the newly es-
tablished emerging markets. Market dealing began when the first joint-stock company (the Arab Auto-mobile) in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was estab-lished in 1354H (1953).
Stock trading started in the Saudi market in a di-
rect and immediate way between sellers and buyers. With the continuous growth, an electronic system, known as “Tadawul”, was launched in 1422H (2002) . The system allows registering, trading, clearing and settling shares immediately. It is directly linked to Saudi commercial banks, and receives orders of sell-ing and buying stocks. Then, it executes transactions and transfers  shares ownership in an automated 
13and accurate way. In 1424H (2004), the Capital Mar -
ket Law (CML) approval of the financial market has 
came out and the major features was to establish the Capital Market Authority to assume the func-tions of regulating the market, develop it, organize the issuance of securities, control it, protect inves-tors, achieve justice, efficiency, transparency, regu-late and control the disclosure of information and others. The system also includes the establishment of a market for trading securities under the name of “The Saudi Capital Market ”.
4-2 Characteristics of the Financial 
Market:
The Saudi stock market is new compared to the 
markets of developed countries such as the U.S., Japan, or the EU countries. It is characterized by the small number of listed companies in the market giv-en the large size of the Saudi economy. The volume of transactions in the market is considered relatively limited compared to the number of issued stocks. This can be defined as a tight market, which leads to large fluctuations in stock prices.A number of factors and variables effect the price of traded stocks on the market. They  include do-mestic economic conditions, economic growth, as well as the problems the economy may suffer from like inflation and unemployment. The profitability of joint-stock companies and current developments in global stock markets also effect it as well as the domestic economic policies in terms of expendi-ture and government expenditure on services and projects in addition to the amount of money and liquidity in the economy. The companies listed in the Saudi stock market are distributed to the following fifteen sectors: “TASI” is an index which summarizes and measures 
the level of performance in the Saudi stock market. Its name consists of the first initials of the English name “Tadawul All Share Index (TASI)”. The Index is calculated as the weighted average of stock prices of the companies operating in the market.
“Tadawul” is an electronic system that is char -
acterized with efficiency in stock dealing and 
trading (selling and buying) in the Saudi market.14Each sector has an index that measures the perfor -
mance by tracking the prices of companies’ stocks 
in that sector. The general index, known as “TASI”, is used to measure the overall performance of the en-tire market and it is a weighted average  of the stock prices of the companies in operating the market.
As previously stated, the Saudi market is charac-
terized by being “tight” and “limited” compared to other similar emerging markets (127 companies at the end of 2008, compared to about 350-400 com-panies in similar emerging markets).
Note that the number of companies has been grow-
ing since the inception of the Capital Market Author -
ity (CMA) in 1424H. The market has a “tight” base due to the limitations in trading stocks, especially 
those of major companies, because government-owned stocks cannot be traded. There is another reason that constricts the amount of traded stocks and keeps potential investors away from these com-panies which is that some major owners control a substantial ownership stake in companies. The larg-est ten Saudi companies account for about 60 – 70% of market size measured by any of the usual criteria: volume, trading, or profits.
It is expected that the view on the Saudi stock mar -
ket remains positive and optimistic in the continu-
ous improvement of the performance of the Saudi economy at the macro level, and the application of all necessary legislations to ensure the regulation of work in the market, increase the number of com-panies, increase the market capital and the applica-tion of the recent government actions to maintain stability
.Industrial In-
vestmentPertochimecal 
IndustriesBanking and Fi-
nancial Services
Agriculture & 
Food IndustriesEnergy & Utili-
tiesCommunica-
tions
Multi-Invest-
mentInsurance Retail
Real Estate 
developmentBuilding and 
ConstructionCement
Hotels and 
T ourismMedia and Pub-
lishingTransport
15Unit Five: Financial Investment 
Strategies:
There are a lot of financial and real investment op-
portunities for savers. Some prefer the financial in-vestment by putting all of his savings in bank de-posits, some prefer owning stocks and bonds while others prefer real investment in lands, real estate or private projects. In the following parts, we will explain the fundamental factors that affect savers’ decisions to invest in a particular area of the above with focus on financial investment.The most important factor is the expected return on investment. Although the return on investment has many concepts which will be addressed in due course, it is agreed that it is the difference between the value of savings before investment and their value after a certain period of investment in specific areas.5-1 Types of Financial Investments:
There are three aspects for savings investment: stocks, bonds and mutual funds.
• Stocks: investing in stocks is characterized by a 
high rate of return in the long term with a high chance of risk, which means that the investor may sustain some loss in his invested capital. 
• Bonds: it is known that private companies need 
financing and therefore sell bonds to savers to obtain the required funds. Deferring to this tool in the Kingdom for the time being is limited. The government also resorts to issuing bonds to finance projects such as building schools, uni-versities, hospitals, constructing roads, building bridges, power plants and other public proj-ects. Although the government resources come from oil and fees, sometimes it may have to is-sue bonds in order to secure additional funding. 
• Mutual Funds: these funds pool savings through 
a Muniment of title with equal values  similar to stocks. They are called investment units. Inves-tors tend to buy stocks of these funds to use some of the advantages that these funds have from the long experience in managing invest-ment. In addition, these funds have the ability to diversify their investments, hence, reducing the risks because of the funds availability.  In-
16vestors entrust the entity that manages their 
mutual funds to take decisions on their behalf. In general, the return on these stocks tend to be more secure with a return of more than the bond’s and less than the stock’s return .
 The most important factor that drives investors to
investing in a particular type of securities is search-
 ing for an investment that generates a high return and have a degree of risk which the investor can
tolerate.5-2  The Financial Investment Strategy
In general, a strategy is defined as a long term plan 
to achieve a specific vision and objectives. Any plan-ning for the future begins by analyzing the present situation and determining the vision and objectives, then determining the best way to achieve that vi-sion and objectives. Financial investment objectives differ from one person to another. The maximum profit may be the goal of a specific investor, while the absence of risk might be the most important objective for another, and adequate liquidity could be the objective of a third investor. Therefore, the investor should have the knowledge and skills that help him reach his objectives.
Elements of the Financial In-
vestment Strategy
A sound financial investment strategy requires de-
termining the following elements:
• Objectives.
• Financial potential available to the investor.
• Time frame necessary to achieve the objectives.
• Expected return on investment.
• Alternatives: any other available investment ar -
eas in which the return on investment can be 
achieved.The areas of investments in mutual funds are diverse 
according to the purposes of establishing the fund. In the first place, there are mutual funds in some sectors of the market, IPOs or real estate. These funds have an important role in supporting the capital market in the Kingdom with the extra funding and expertise they offer to the market.
17The following are considerations that must be taken 
into account in setting up the financial investment strategy:
• Realism: objectives must be achievable and not 
far away from reality. For example: if we sup-pose that someone could save (50 thousand Riyals) a year and another person could only save (10 thousand Riyals) a year, and that both of them are planning to buy a house for up to (500 thousand Riyals) after 10 years, it is clear that the first person’s plan is more realistic than the second one 
• Flexibility: it means the ability to adjust the ob-
jectives and alternatives through the disposal of current investments and replace them with new ones according to any developments in order to achieve the objectives. • Familiarity with the basics of financial invest-
ment: It means knowing the investment tools 
and mechanisms in order to avoid putting the 
investor at risk and making him able to take the best investment decisions.
5-3 Basics of Financial Investment:
The most important basics of financial investment 
are:
• Identifying investment characteristics: For exam-
ple, share value and return are affected by the level of success and failure of issuing companies . They are also affected by economic fluctuations in the domestic and global economy. It is normal that these fluctuations reflect the share prices especially in the short term. In the long term, however, investing in stocks is considered one of the investments that generates high returns compared to other financial securities. As for the bonds, the return tends to be stable as the government ensures that the bond holder can get the return stated in the bond at the time of maturity. In addition, companies that care about their position and financial reputation guaran-tee the bonds issued by them. Participating in  mutual funds for young investors ensures sta-bility in the value of their savings due to the 
18experience these funds’ mangers have.
• Identifying risks associated with investing: Risks 
in the simplest sense means the possibility that 
an investment can achieve an actual profit after a period of time that is less than the expect-ed profit, or the investor suffers from loss in his capital.  Investment varies according to the ambiguity associated with the achievements of expected profits. There are investments associ-ated with high risks and others associated with low risks. The investor in stocks must know that the rate of return on investment is associated with risks in a direct (positive) relationship. In other words, the investor can achieve higher return if he is willing to tolerate higher risks. Also, he must accept lower rates of return if the risk is lower. It must be noted that the in-vestor’s ability to tolerate risk varies depend-ing on the available possibilities as well as the investor’s age and nature which reflects his per -
sonal preference to take risks. An investor who avoids risks prefers to acquire portfolios which achieve assured small returns. On the contrary, an investor who loves taking risks prefers to have financial portfolios which generate higher returns with higher risks.Risks that face investors can be classified 
into three categories:
• Company-specific risk: the source of risk is from 
inside the company that issued the securities. 
The sources of this type of risk are numerous and result from the nature of the company’s business , being trapped in debts, having inad-equate liquidity to conduct the business, bank-ruptcy and liquidation. In this case, the priority is to pay out the company’s obligations to the creditors, not the shareholders.
• Market risk: it is linked to the economic con-
ditions facing all companies at the same time. In cases of recession, the demand for all goods in the market declines which adversely affects companies’ earnings. This makes the value of stocks declines. Political factors also influence the market’s stability.
• Concentration risk: it is where a financial port-
folio is undiversified and consists of one stock or a few stocks. This means that any potential decline in the performance of the company is-suing the stock may lead to great losses. Often 
Recession is a decline in the level of economic activ-
ity accompanied by a drop in the output of goods, services and an increase in unemployment.19these risks can be overcome by diversifying the 
areas of financial investment.
• Investment Preference Criteria: They are the 
criteria by which investments are chosen; they include returns, risk, diversification and liquidity. 
• Return: is the percentage of change in asset 
value (subject of investment). The investor usu-ally seeks financial investments that achieve the highest possible return.
• Risk: measured by the fluctuation of the asset 
value. In other words, the financial investment degree of risk increases with the increase of price fluctuations between one period and an-other. Therefore, the investor must choose the types of investments that have acceptable risk limits.
• Diversification: diversified investments means 
that the financial portfolio contains various and different types of securities (various stocks + bonds + mutual funds) with different returns and risk levels. One of the qualities of diver -
sity is that it leads to reducing investment risks which is one of the desired characteristics in 
any portfolio.
Which one is better? Putting all your eggs in one 
basket or putting them in several baskets!
• Liquidity: the ability to easily convert in-
vestments into cash without losses.
Unit Six: Opportunities and 
Challenges
Financial markets provide many opportunities that 
increase the potential of profitability and growth. These markets also face a lot of challenges that re-duce their efficiency and increases financial invest-ment risks . In the following section we address the most important opportunities and challenges and conclude with a general advice for investors.
Securities portfolio: it is a selected group of number of investment channels or number of securities that achieve the investor’s objectives in terms of return, degree of risk or growth.
Shares of an investment port-
folio that lacks diversification
(higher risk level)Shares          Bonds    Mutual funds
    Diversified investment (lower risk)
206-1 Opportunities
The tremendous developments in communications 
and information technology in the past few years have impacted all aspects of life and economy in-cluding financial markets. The financial applications of these developments have contributed to creating many investment opportunities and reducing the ef-fort and cost associated with financial and invest-ment operations. That is by:
• Reducing the costs of information access and financial analysis needed by the investor espe-cially with regard to the movement of stock prices or accessing any information about the company’s financial status. Whether at home or office, or even in car, the investor is now capable of knowing different stock price movements at low costs by using communication networks and worldwide web information services (In-ternet).
• Reducing the cost and effort required to carry out the buying and selling transactions. It be-came possible for the investor to carry out any transactions directly through the internet or a financial broker in any place of the world.
• Making use of the financial and consulting ser -
vices offered by licensed financial consulting companies and using their capabilities in manag-ing financial portfolios for the investors’ benefit. 
• Benefiting from financial globalization. It is now 
possible for any investor in the world to take advantage of the investment opportunities that may present themselves in other countries. 
• Increasing the investors’ capacity to diversify their investments and take advantage of addi-tional opportunities that are more satisfying for their investment needs.
6-2 Challenges
Financial markets represent the most important channels for transforming savings into investments and help to increase production and economic growth. However, they can be misused one way or the other. They could be a direct reason that causes losses to investors and become a source of threat for the individual fortune and decline in the national economy. The main challenges the investors face in financial markets are explored in the following sec-tion:
• Speculation: a speculator is a person who ac-cepts the risk to sell or buy securities in order to achieve quick profits depending on his an-ticipations  for future price movements. T o un-derstand how speculation can be risky on the market, there are two types of traded stocks: 21investment stocks and speculative stocks. An 
investment stock is known as the stock that is issued by reputable well-established compa-nies with efficiency and growth prospects. It is normal that those stocks are sold at fair pric-es. Speculative stocks, on the other hand, are stocks that are issued by small companies. Sav-ers can be divided in a similar way as well where there are  Intelligent Savers and Naive Savers. Intelligent savers are those who are unique in their intelligence, skills and their ability to cope with the market’s analysis . Naive savers on the other hand, are not in the same level of delib-eration and sense so they buy stocks not based on market realistic analysis but are more likely to walk on the footsteps of the first group as well as follow rumors. The speculation begins when the first group purchase a weak com-pany’s stocks based on expectations that they will later be able to sell it faster and at higher price to the second group. The speculation idea is based on the purchase of stocks even if the price was over the fair value because there will be someone who will buy it at a higher price. The company’s share price increases and other investors think that the price will continue to rise, so they rush to buy it, and consequently the price increases even more. After the second 
group purchase the stocks they cannot sell it later at a higher price so they rush to get rid of them then the stock price falls more and more so they lose. It could get worse if the second group had financed their purchase of stocks through bank loans. This exposes them to the risk of losing part or all of their invested capital, and they may become debtors to banks. The re-sult is that a small number of the big investors has achieved a fortune in short time by trad-ing speculative stocks, but the majority, most of which are small investors have lost their for -
tune and become debtors.
• The control of big speculators:  it means that a limited number of speculators control the stocks  of several companies. Since they own large stakes in those companies, they can push 
22stock prices up by trading. This will lead  small 
investors to rush and buy weak performing  stocks. Big investors make profits at the ex-pense of small investors through speculation on those stocks. This results in financial crises that have a substantial negative impact on the market. 
6-3 Tips for Investors:
• An Investor should use his mind, his knowledge and all the available information to make the right investment decision. 
• Take a look at the tips and instructions provid-ed by domestic and global securities authorities for investors on selecting and managing invest-ments. For example, the Capital Market Author -
ity in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia launched a center on its website to educate investors. It also published many brochures and organized various educational events from time to time to 
raise investor awareness. 
• Rely mainly on sources of self funding in the fi-nancial investments, and not too much on bor -
rowing.
• An investor should diversify his financial invest-ments after determining the risk levels he can tolerate.
• An investor should determine the type of in-vestment in terms of time to match his goals. Is it a short-term investment or a long-term or in between?
• An investor should regularly assess the feasibil-ity of his current investments, then make chang-es in the portfolio components to get along with the prevailing market conditions.
• Do not follow market rumors which could be passed only to mislead some investors.
• An investor should not allow sentiments to control his mind, and should have enough cour -
age to bear all the consequences of his deci-
23sions; overreacting could increase his loss.
• Stay away from speculation, especially in losing 
companies. 
For more information, please don’t hesitate to contact us on the following address:
Capital Market Authority
Al-Faisaliah T ower, King Fahad Road
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
PO. Box 87171 Riyadh 11642
T oll-Free 800 245 1111
Contact Center 00966 11 205 3000
Fax 00966 11 490 6599
Email info@cma.org.sa
© All Rights reserved 
Y ou can also visit our website on the following address
www.cma.org.sa
“Many are familiar with early stage investing. Many are familiar with technology. Many are 
familiar with disruption and innovation. Yet, few truly understand how different an animal is the financial services industry. Such vectors as regulation, compliance, risk, handling other people’s money, the psychological behaviours around money and capital ensure that our financial services industry is full of quirks and complexities. As such The FinTech Book offers a refreshing take and knowledge expertise, which neophytes as well as experts will be well advised to read.” 
Pascal Bouvier, Venture Partner, Santander InnoVentures
“This first ever crowd-sourced book on the broad FinTech ecosystem is an extremely worthwhile read for anyone trying to understand why and how technology will impact most, if not all, of the financial services industry. It captures and highlights the disruptive forces at play. Start-up FinTech firms across the globe will have a profound impact on the future delivery of services to both institutions and individuals. This book is a terrific compilation of information and prescient thought that should prove useful to both financial services practitioners and users.”
R. Todd Ruppert, retired CEO and President of T. Rowe Price Global  
Investment Services and serial FinTech investor and advisor
“Sometimes a book explains how the world has changed. Rarely, a book comes along that explains how the world is going to change in the future. This is one of those rare compilations that describe the fundamental changes taking place in how people live their lives. It portrays a world where, through a potent potion of technology and entrepreneurialism, power moves away from central banking institutions to local communities and the people within them. This book helps explain why London is the global hotspot for innovation in financial and payment technology. You won’t be able to put it down.”
Tony Craddock, Director General, Emerging Payments Association
“Finally FinTech is entering the mainstream vernacular such that more than just we finance, banking and payments geeks and innovators are aware of the revolution underway. If you’re looking for a ‘crash-course’ on the FinTech industry, and the explosion of innovation that it’s creating across the globe, look no further. The depth and diversity of views herein is staggering; a phenomenal compilation that will get you up-to-speed fast. Definitely worth a read.”
Roy Vella, FinTech Expert, Public Speaker and  
Managing Director of Vella Ventures Ltd
“Fantastic to see a book on FinTech brought together by the community and written by the community. It will be valuable to anyone starting off in FinTech”. 
Nigel Verdon, Founder, Currency Cloud, Partner, Digital Change“FinTech is about all of us – it’s the future intersection of people, technology and money, and it’s happening now there is an explosion of possibilities on our doorstep. Susanne and The FinTech Book  paint a visual picture of the possibilities and make it real for every reader. 
A must-read for every disruptor, innovator, creator, banker.”
Derek White, Global Head of Customer Solutions, BBVA 
“FinTech is reshaping the financial experience of millions of people and businesses around the world today, and has the potential to dramatically alter our understanding of financial services tomorrow. We’re in the thick of the development of an Internet of Value that will deliver sweeping, positive change around the world just as the internet itself did a few short decades ago. The FinTech Book  captures the unique ecosystem that has coalesced 
around this sector, bringing together visionary entrepreneurs, innovative finance leaders, and forward-thinking policymakers to comment on the exciting changes taking place.”
Chris Larsen, Co-Founder and CEO of Ripple
“There are few books out there that capture the pulse of how the internet is changing finance, but The FinTech Book has captured the views of many of the key players building the ValueWeb. It will prove an essential read to anyone wanting to know more about the next generation of banking, insurance and finance.” 
Chris Skinner, Author of ValueWeb and Chair of the Financial Services Club 
“Over the next decade, the notion of what a bank is will be turned on its head – where bricks and mortar give way to apps, artificial intelligence, and decentralized ledgers. The FinTech Book comes at a perfect time when incumbents, start-ups, and investors alike are trying to grasp what this future holds, for the stakes of getting it right or wrong are truly enormous.” 
Greg Rogers, Executive Director, Techstars
“The FinTech Book provides an excellent open platform to hear from a wide variety of thought-provoking voices. True innovative change only happens with the support of collaborative ecosystems. The FinTech Book allows readers to hold this ecosystem in the palm of their hands,” 
Liz Lumley, Director of Global Ecosystem Development,  
Startupbootcamp FinTech and InsurTech 
“A truly indispensable guide for anyone who wants to understand the market dynamics of the FinTech revolution and the disruption behind it. Intelligent and thought provoking, you’ll either be exhilarated by the scale of the growth opportunities or horrified that your world is going to change so fundamentally.” 
Dr Louise Beaumont, Head of Public Affairs and  
Marketing, GLI Finance Limited“London has established itself firmly as a global powerhouse for FinTech. With the 
world’s leading international financial centre and Europe’s fastest growing technology hub, London is at the forefront of the latest innovations in financial technology and we are changing the way governments, businesses and consumers manage their financial affairs. We are also a city of great creativity, where new ideas thrive and disruption is welcome. All these ingredients will help London to become the FinTech capital of the world. It is important that we continue to promote the sector and shout about our successes. The FinTech Book  not only provides valuable insight into the industry from 
some of the leading experts in London, but also shines a spotlight on what makes London an ideal destination for FinTech companies.”
David Slater, Director of International Trade and Investment, London & Partners
“With many of the contributors to this book we shared the very first FinTech days, back to 2008. In the middle of the hype now, where often noise and relevance are intertwined, I am really happy to see so many meaningful thoughts and opinion pieces about what is certainly one of the biggest pivotal shifts in financial services.”
Matteo Rizzi, FinTech Investor and Co-Founder, FinTechStage
“FINTECH Circle are at the forefront of the latest FinTech developments and innovation, and The FinTech Book  reflects their open, collaborative and inclusive 
approach. It offers a unique insight into key trends in this industry to each part of the ecosystem – entrepreneurs, investors and service providers alike will connect with the dynamics captured here. Reaching out to such a wide range of experts provides unprecedented insight into FinTech, making this an interesting read for anyone interested in this space.”
Axel Coustere, Founding Partner, The Hub Exchange
“The FinTech book is a great jumping off point for anyone looking to understand FinTech, especially in Asia. As this new kind of technology becomes more ubiquitous, resources like this book will become more and more valuable to both newbies and experienced hands.”
Vladislav Solodkiy, CEO, Life.Sreda 
“This book is a brilliant kaleidoscope of themes, success stories, and current and future trends in the financial technology space. A must-read for anyone who is interested in FinTech, it provides a solid overview of the various ways digital innovation can transform banking and finance.”
Dr Markos Zachariadis, Assistant Professor, Warwick Business School; FinTech 
Research Fellow at Cambridge Digital Innovation, University of Cambridge“There is a lot of confusion around what FinTech really is and how it could be deployed by existing financial services companies. This book is well timed as it cuts through the hype and allows the reader to review practical approaches from actual exponents and thereby educate themselves on where different technologies can be applied to their businesses.”
Brendan Bradley, Chief Innovation Officer and Member of the Eurex Executive 
Board; Chairman of the Executive Board, Deutsche Boerse Asia Holdings Ltd 
“The FinTech Book  really lives up to its title. Janos and Susanne have not just succeeded in 
explaining the key trends, drivers and implications across a wide spectrum of FinTech themes (including payments, crowdfunding, advisory and cryptocurrencies), but have also clearly laid out the path forward, pragmatically detailing enablers such as regulatory / compliance management, analytic capabilities, and technical competency that are required to effectively capture and monetize the different FinTech disruptions. This is a truly cross-discipline, hands-on and comprehensive FinTech bible, which all players in the FinTech space, including investors, entrepreneurs, incumbent institutions and regulators, can benefit from.”
Robin J. Loh, General Manager, Ping’an FinTech
“FinTech innovation is an important component of economic development, especially for emerging economies. There are few books that summarize the FinTech movement more completely than The FinTech Book. It provides a wonderful summary of the global innovation in the industry to date.”
Melissa Guzy, Managing Partner and Founder, Arbor Ventures
“I have a passion for helping businesses invest and grow, and often the key to this is education. At a stroke here is a book that opens up the FinTech world to all who are curious, ambitious and entrepreneurial. FinTech is moving at a tremendous pace and this truly excellent book enables the reader to keep up and even get ahead of how global innovation in financial and payment technology will change and shape the world we live in. The joint editors, Susanne Chishti and Janos Barberis, have done an outstanding job.” 
John Davies, CEO, The Just Loans Group PLC
“London is rapidly becoming known as a leading FinTech centre internationally. The development of The FinTech Book is timely and innovative, capturing the knowledge of the City’s ecosystem players. It will be a valuable resource for those seeking to understand the implications of these disruptive technologies for the finance landscape.” 
Professor Michael Barrett, Cambridge Judge Business School, 
Academic Director, Cambridge Digital InnovationThe FinTech 
BookThis edition first published 2016
© 2016 Susanne Chishti and Janos Barberis 
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom 
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see 
our website at www.wiley.com. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included 
in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, 
service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. 
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with 
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataNames: Chishti, Susanne, author. | Barberis, Janos, author.
Title: The FinTech Book / Susanne Chishti, Janos Barberis.Description: Hoboken : Wiley, 2016. | Includes index.Identifiers: LCCN 2016000567| ISBN 9781119218876 (paperback) Subjects: LCSH: Banks and banking. | Bank loans. | Credit. | Financial services industry—Information technology. | BISAC: BUSINESS & ECONOMICS / Finance.Classification: LCC HG1601 .C47 2016 | DDC 332.1028/4—dc23 LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2016000567A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.ISBN 978-1-119-21887-6 (pbk) ISBN 978-1-119-21893-7 (ebk)ISBN 978-1-119-21888-3 (ebk) ISBN 978-1-119-21890-6 (ebk) 
Cover Design: Wiley 
Cover Image: © pkproject/Shutterstock
Set in 8/13 Helvetica LT Std by Aptara, New Delhi, India 
Printed in Great Britain by TJ International Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall, UKThe FinTech 
Book
The Financial Technology Handbook for  
Investors, Entrepreneurs and Visionaries
Edited by
Susanne Chishti
Janos BarberisPreface  viii
About the Editors  x
Acknowledgements  xii
1. Introduction
Banking and the E-Book Moment  6
Why We’re so Excited About FinTech  10
Current Trends in Financial Technology  13
2. FinTech Themes
Banks Need to Think Collaboration Rather Than Competition  20
Global Compliance is Key  22
Lending (Capital) in the 21st Century  25
The Next Big Innovation in FinTech – Identity  28
Tech Giants Becoming Non-Bank Banks  31
Design is No Longer an Option – User Experience (UX) in FinTech  34
3. FinTech Hubs
Nurturing New FinTech Communities  42
La (French) FinTech Connection  45
The Journey Towards an Integrated FinTech Ecosystem – The 
Netherlands  48
Luxembourg, a Future FinTech Hub?  51
Vienna as the No. 1 FinTech Hub in Mobile Payments?  53
India’s FinTech Ecosystem  56
Singapore, the FinTech Hub for Southeast Asia  58
4. Emerging Markets and Social Impact
FinTech – The Not So Little Engine That Can  66
Why Am I Not Gonna Be Able to Enter a Bank?  69
The Rise of the Rest in FinTech  72Smartphones, FinTech, and Education – Helping the Unbanked  
Reach Financial Inclusion  75
The Social Impact of FinTech in Nigeria  78
India and the Pyramid of Opportunity  81
5. FinTech Solutions
Rewiring the Deal – The Path Forward for B2B Supply Chains  88
Payments and Point of Sales (POS) Innovation  92
Predictive Algorithms – Building Innovative Online Banking  
Solutions  95
Big Data is the Cornerstone of Regulatory Compliance  
Systems  100
FinTech Solutions in Complex Contracts Optimization  106
Behavioural Biometrics – A New Era of Security  109
Ultra-Fast Text Analytics in Trading Strategies  112
Regulated Crowdfunding Ecosystems  117
Remittances – International FX Payments at Low Cost  120
FinTech Solutions for Small Businesses  123
Payment Solutions Including Apple Pay  125
FinTech Solutions Benefiting other Sectors  128
FinTech Innovation for Wearables  131
6. Capital and Investment
Investment and Capital – Back to Basics  138
Angel Investing – Access to “Smart Money” to Fund the Best  
FinTech Companies  141
Crowdfunding and Marketplace (P2P) Lending – Online Capital 
Marketplaces as New Asset Classes to Access Funding  144
The Digital Investment Space – Spanning from Social Trading to 
Digital Private Banking – A FinTech Sector Made for  
Disruption?  147
Leading the Way with an Investor-led Approach to  
Crowdfunding  149Contents
viContentsviMy Robo Advisor was an iPod – Applying the Lessons from  
Other Sectors to FinTech Disruption  152
Crowdsourced Alpha  155
To Crowdsource a Hedge Fund  160
Providing Capital and Beyond  162
7 . Enterprise Innovation
Can Banks Innovate?  170
So, You Think the Innovation Lab is the Answer?  173
FinTechs and Banks – Collaboration is Key  179
Partnerships Are the Key to Addressing Financial and Digital 
Exclusion  183
Corporate Venture Capital   –  The New Power Broker in the  
FinTech Innovation Ecosystem  186
The Insurance Opportunity  190
8. More Success Stories
eToro – Building the World’s Largest Social Investment Network  196
Avoka – An Overnight Success, 13 Years in the Making  198
Bankable – Banking as a Service  201
The Next Chapter in Citi’s Story of Innovation  203
FinTech Trends from the Frontline – Building Collaborative 
Opportunities for Start-ups, Market Infrastructures, and  
Wholesale Banks  2069. Crypto-currencies and Blockchains
FinTech + Digital Currency   – Convergence or Collision?  212
Blockchain and Crypto-currencies  217
10. The Future of FinTech
How Emerging Technologies Will Change Financial Services  226
The Future of Financial Services  229
Banking on Innovation Through Data  232
Why FinTech Banks Will Rule the World  235
The FinTech Supermarket – The Bank is Dead, Long Live the Bank!  238
Banks Partnering with FinTech Start-ups to Create an Integrated 
Customer Experience  241
The Rise of BankTech – The Beauty of a Hybrid Model for Banks  245
FinTech Impact on Retail Banking – From a Universal Banking  
Model to Banking Verticalization  248
Embracing the Connected API Economy  253
Banking Like Water  258
Eliminating Friction in Customers’ Financial Lives  261
FinTech is the Future Itself  264
A Future Without Money  267
Ethics in FinTech?  270
List of Contributors  273
Index  291 
Contentsvii51%60%
50%40%30%20%
10%
0%
Platforms
Business to ConsumerMobile Tech
Business to BusinessRetail Banking
Investment BankingTransaction...
Financial Data & AnalyticsCorporate Banking Risk Management
Compliance/RegulatoryAsset ManagementBlockchain
Private BankingCryptocurrenciesInsurance
Cybersecurity49% 48% 48%46%
43% 43%Expertise of our Authors
39%
34%30%
25% 24% 24%23%19% 18% 17%High School DegreeEducation of our Authors
Undergraduate University Degree
Postgraduate University Degree11%
29%
60%Preface 
We both started off delving into the field of FinTech at roughly the same point in 
time. Eager to learn more, we quickly discovered that there existed no single, consolidated, and authoritative source on the subject. On a remarkably sunny London day, we met up in a local café, ascertaining our mutual passion for FinTech and our desire to find out more. Typically of entrepreneurs, we decided to fill the currently existing gap in FinTech knowledge and produce a FinTech book ourselves, a book that would provide food for thought to FinTech newbies, pioneers, and well-seasoned experts alike. This is how The FinTech Book was born.
The reader will notice that this is the first “globally crowdsourced” treatment 
of the subject. The reason we decided to reach out to the global FinTech community in sourcing contributors for the book lies in the inherently fragmented nature of the field of Financial Technology. There was no single author, organization, or indeed region in the world that could exhaustively cover all the facets and nuances of FinTech. What is more, by being able to call upon a truly global contributor base, we not only stayed true to the spirit of FinTech, making 
Figure 1:  What is the highest educational qualification of our 
authors?Figure 2:  Areas in which our authors have domain expertise (multiple 
choices were possible)use of technological channels of communication in reaching out to, selecting, and reviewing our would-be contributors, we also made sure that every corner of the globe had the chance to have its say. Thus, we aimed to fulfil one of the most important purposes of The FinTech Book , namely to give a voice to those 
that would remain unheard, those that did not belong to a true FinTech community in their local areas, and spread that voice to an international audience. We have immensely enjoyed the journey of editing The FinTech Book and sincerely hope that you will enjoy the journey of reading it, at least as much.
More than 160 authors from 27 countries submitted 189 abstracts to be part of 
the book. We asked our global FinTech community for their views regarding which abstracts they would like to have fully expanded for The FinTech Book. From all these potential contributors, we selected 86 authors who have been asked to write full chapters, which have now been included in this book. We conducted a questionnaire among all our selected authors to further understand their background and expertise.viii
Pre FaceviiiOur selected final authors come from 20 countries. The majority have 
postgraduate university degrees (60%) (Figure 1), strong domain expertise across many fields (Figure 2), and 93% of our finalist authors have had articles published before.
Figures 3 and 4 show that almost half our finalist authors are entrepreneurs working 
for FinTech start-ups (many of them part of the founding team), a quarter come from established financial and technology companies, and another quarter from service providers such as consulting firms or law firms servicing the FinTech sector.
Almost a fifth of our authors work for start-ups with up to five people and another 
55% for start-ups/small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) of up to 100 people. 17% of our contributors are employed by a large organization of more than 1,000 employees.
In summary, we are very proud of our highly qualified authors, their strong 
expertise, and passion for FinTech through being either entrepreneurs or often 13%
12%
28%47%Established Financial Services
CompanyWhere do our Authors work?
Established Tech Company
Service Providers
FinTech Start-ups
Figure 3:  Type of company in which our authors were working17% 19%
55%9%1−5 peopleSize of Companies where our Authors work
6−100 people
101−1000 people
1001+ people
Figure 4:  Size of companies for which our authors work
“intrapreneurs” in large established organizations who all are committed to play 
a significant role in the global FinTech revolution. These remarkable people are willing to share their insights with all of us in these pages.
Firstly, this project would not have been possible without the dedication and 
efforts of all contributors to The FinTech Book  (both those who submitted their 
initial abstracts for consideration by the global FinTech community, as well as the final authors whose insights you will be reading shortly). In addition, we would like to thank Inna Amesheva, Suki Jutla, and Maya Petersohn for their invaluable help in the final stages of the editing process. Last, but certainly not least, we would like to thank our editors at Wiley whose guidance and help ensured that the project which started off as an idea in a London café has become the book which you are now holding in your hands.
Susanne Chishti and Janos Barberis
The FinTech Book  Editors
2016
Pre FaceixSusanne Chishti
Susanne Chishti is the CEO of FINTECH Circle, Europe’s 1st Angel Network focused 
on FinTech investments, founder of London FINTECH Tours, and Chairman of FINTECH Circle Innovate. Selected as one of the 100 leading Women in FinTech and top 15 FinTech UK Twitter influencers, she was recognized in the European Digital Financial Services ‘Power 50’ 2015, an independent ranking of the most influential people in digital financial services in Europe.
Susanne is a senior capital markets manager, entrepreneur, and investor 
with strong FinTech expertise. She is a mentor, judge, and coach at FinTech events such as SWIFT Innotribe, Barclays TechStars Accelerator, Cambridge Judge Business School, and Startupbootcamp FinTech Accelerators. She has more than 14 years’ experience across Deutsche Bank, Lloyds Banking Group, Morgan Stanley, and Accenture in London and Hong Kong. Selected among top UK FinTech Influencers by City A.M. Susanne is also the author of FinTech articles and an international keynote speaker at FinTech conferences. She runs one of the leading online FinTech communities of FinTech entrepreneurs, investors, senior management from established financial and tech firms, and thought leaders – FINTECH Circle’s LinkedIn Group with more than 10,000 members worldwide. 
You can follow Susanne on Twitter via her account @SusanneChishti.
About FINTECH Circle
Founded by Susanne Chishti, FINTECH Circle is an international brand linking 
the FinTech ecosystem of investors, entrepreneurs, business leaders, and influencers who all are enthusiastic about the growing FinTech sector globally. In addition to accessing top FinTech investment opportunities via the Angel Network, members also enjoy knowledge sharing amongst peers, access to board and non-exec positions in FinTech companies, and the opportunity to attend exclusive FinTech and angel investment educational seminars (www.fintechcircle.com). In addition, London FINTECH Tours (www.fintechtours.com) provide non-UK FinTech entrepreneurs with the opportunity to visit London to leverage London’s FinTech ecosystem of investors and clients to help them grow their business. FINTECH Circle Innovate (www.fintechcircleinnovate.com) was set up in response to demand from growing numbers of banks and large institutions who needed help to close the gap between corporate strategy and sustainable innovation in FinTech. We guide them through the global FinTech landscape and are able to source the best targets for partnership, incubation, investment and acquisition purposes. You can follow FINTECH Circle on Twitter via @FINTECHCircle and @FINTECHTours, and FINTECH Circle Innovate via @FTCInnovate. 
Janos Barberis
Janos Barberis is a Millennial in FinTech, recognized as a top-35 global FinTech leader. His expertise is focused on the new regulatory considerations raised by the development of FinTech. With a passion to drive change, he founded FinTech HK, a thought leadership platform, and the SuperCharger – a FinTech Accelerator that strategically leverages Hong Kong as a gateway to Asia. 
In parallel, he sits on the advisory board of the World Economic Forum’s FinTech 
Committee and is a PhD Candidate at Hong Kong University Law School. Janos regularly delivers Keynote speeches and has been featured in Forbes, The Financial Times and Business Insider, among others. He is also the Co-Founder and Editor of The FinTech Book.
Previously, Janos was the first hire at a prospective UK challenger bank, Lintel, 
helping it to secure a banking license from the PRA and FCA. This role followed a specialist interest, developed over 7 years, in financial systems and their stability. Notably, in 2012 Janos proposed to reform the Chinese shadow banking sector by developing P2P lending channels. He also introduced a framework of developing About the Editors
xAbout the editorsxreal-time and dynamic regulatory supervision models for financial networks, paving 
the way towards what is now regarded as RegTech.
Janos holds an LLM in Corporate and Financial Law (HKU) as well as a BSc in 
Economics & Finance and an LLB in Law (UK). He has been awarded a Research Postgraduate Scholarship from Hong Kong University Law School. He co-authored the academic paper, “The Evolution of FinTech” which ranked within the Top 10 of SSRN globally.
You can follow Janos on Twitter via his account @JNBarberisAbout FinTech HK
Founded by Janos Barberis in July 2014, FinTech HK is a thought leadership 
platform that has the objective of catalysing Hong Kong’s position as a world-leading FinTech Hub. FinTech HK produced Hong Kong’s first FinTech Report: “The Rise of FinTech: Getting Hong Kong to Lead the Digital Financial Transition in APAC.”
* Since then, the platform has hosted and supported a number of local 
and international FinTech events. FinTech HK is a main supporting organization of the SuperCharger, Hong Kong’s first home-grown FinTech accelerator dedicated to both early- and late-stage companies that are scaling within Asia.
* The report is available on: http://www.slideshare.net/FinTechHk/fintech-hong-kong-report.
About the editorsxiAcknowledgements
When we started discussing our desire for a book which would summarize the 
global FinTech sector in an easy way, it was just an idea between two people. From that moment onwards we spoke to hundreds of our FinTech friends globally and everybody supported the idea. FinTech entrepreneurs across all continents were eager to share their powerful insights. They wanted to explain the new business models and technologies they were working on to change the world of finance. FinTech investors, “intrapreneurs”, innovation leaders at leading financial institutions and thought leaders were keen to describe their embrace of the FinTech revolution. Finally, many FinTech visionaries wanted to share their vision for the future.
This global effort of crowdsourcing such insights is a world first. We are aware 
that this would not have been possible without the FINTECH Circle and FinTech HK global communities. We are very grateful to our members who have been with us since 2014 when both groups were created. Our FINTECH Circle Group on LinkedIn has more than 10,000 members globally and all readers of the book are invited to join and continue the conversation online. We also want to thank our 20,000 Twitter followers across our Twitter accounts @FINTECHCircle;  @FinTechHK; @FTCInnovate; @FINTECHTours; @SuperChargerFT; and of course our dedicated Twitter account @TheFINTECHBook. Without the public support and engagement of our global FinTech community this book would not have been possible.
The authors you will read about have been chosen by our global FinTech 
community purely on merit, thus no matter how big or small their organization, no matter in which country they work in, no matter if they were well known or still undiscovered, everybody had the same chance. We are proud of that because we believe that FinTech will change the world of finance forever and the global FinTech community is made up of the smartest, most innovative and nicest people we know. Thank you for being part of our Journey. It is difficult to name you all here, but you are all listed in the directory at the end of this book.
We also wanted to select the best publisher for the book and we have chosen Wiley 
to allow readers globally to buy their hardcopies or order online. A special thanks goes to our fantastic editor Thomas Hyrkiel who saw the vision for the book from the moment we met. Thank you and to your team – we could not have done it without your amazing support!
We look forward to hearing from you. Please visit our website  
www.TheFINTECHBook.com for additional bonus content from our global FinTech community, consisting of the top FinTech entrepreneurs, investors, intrapreneurs and FinTech visionaries!
Please send us your comments on The FinTech Book and let us know how you wish 
to be engaged by dropping us a line at info@thefintechbook.com
Susanne Chishti
 Janos Barberis
Twitter @susannechishti  Twitter @JNBarberisxiixiiAcknowledge Ments1Introduction1Financial Technology or FinTech is one of the most promising 
industries in 2016. The FinTech revolution, driven by a wave of start-ups with innovative new business and revenue models, new products and services, is changing finance for the better globally. These FinTech firms offer users a range of financial services that were once almost exclusively the business of banks. Should banks be afraid of the FinTech boom?
At the end of 2015 Forbes  concluded:
The banking industry is ripe for change with the rise of fintech startups, 
the growing popularity of blockchain technology, and the dominance of millennials. The industry is evolving and the ever-increasing need to prepare for cybersecurity threats remains top of mind, as banks continue evaluating new threats and potential fraud risks.
1
This introduction provides a broad overview of the Financial 
Technology sector by setting the scene and explaining what is actually meant by “FinTech”. These chapters serve as stepping stones paving the way towards the more specific topics that are covered in greater detail in The FinTech Book .
1 Forbes , 20 November 2015: “Millennials and FinTech are Top of Mind for Traditional Banks”,<http://www.forbes.com/sites/franksorrentino/2015/11/20/heard-at-the=2015-ABA-national-convention/>.Banking and the E-Book 
Moment
By Warren Mead 
Partner, Head of Challenger Banks and Global Co-Lead FinTech, KPMG
Cast your mind back to 2007, the year that saw the launch of the first-generation 
Kindle. At that time e-readers were widely available in electronics stores but there was no real indication that a revolution was about to sweep the publishing industry. The merits of the e-book were widely discussed by book buyers, but the printed word still reigned supreme – digital consumption was very much a minority sport.
Fast-forward to the present day and both readers and publishers are in a very 
different place, and sales of e-books have rocketed. According to figures published by Statista,
1 the US digital book market was worth just US$0.27 billion in 2008, but 
by 2015 that figure had risen to $5.69 billion. Physical book sales haven’t collapsed; what we have seen is digital publishing taking a rapid route from the periphery of public consciousness to the mainstream in less than 10 years. The e-book is now part of our lives. It’s a journey that reflects the willingness – and eagerness – of consumers to embrace convenience even where this is made possible by complex new technologies, delivery channels, and business models. And this journey is currently being echoed in the financial services industry.
The Shifting Financial Landscape
The world’s major retail banks still dominate the financial services landscape, providing the deposit, payment, and credit facilities that we all use and take for granted, but they are no longer the only players in town. Today’s online shopper might pay with a debit card but equally they might choose PayPal. The business that would once have relied on its bank for credit can now borrow from peer-to-peer (P2P) platforms or specialist lenders. And digital banks are vying with their bricks-and-mortar counterparts for customer deposits. It’s all about access and convenience.
1 Revenue from e-book sales in the United States from 2008 to 2018 (in billion US dollars), http://
www.statista.com/statistics/190800/ebook-sales-revenue-forecast-for-the-us-market/.As alternative finance gains traction with customers, FinTech is approaching its e-book moment – the point at which a critical mass of consumers and business customers see the technology-driven solutions offered by new players in the marketplace as a viable – and often preferable – alternative to the services offered by incumbent banks.
The implications for the traditional banking industry are immense. Developments 
in FinTech have the potential to erode the brand equity of the incumbent players and eat into market share. But banks also have an opportunity to embrace FinTech innovation and offer new solutions to their customers.
An Unfinished Revolution
Anyone seeking evidence of the potential market power and reach of technology-driven finance providers need look no further than the now venerable PayPal. Launched in 1998, the company was taken over by eBay in 2002 and became the default payment system across all of the online auction operator’s international sites. Since then PayPal has expanded its offering and it now sits alongside debit and credit cards as a payment option on an ever-increasing number of e-commerce sites. Whether that online performance will translate to dominance in face-to-face transactions remains to be seen. Today, the company boasts more than 100 million active accounts and processes an average of US$315 million in payments every day.
2
The payments market is evolving fast and this evolution will chase convenience, speed, and data collation. Witness the initial success of Apple’s contactless payment system Apple Pay, which allows consumers to purchase and pay for goods and services simply by placing an iPhone 6 in proximity to a point-of-sale terminal. Apple Pay is just launching in the UK, but it currently accounts for US$2 out of every $3 processed by contactless systems in the US.
3
One of the single greatest obstacles is ubiquity – the consumer can be faced with a myriad ways to pay. We are now witnessing a global wave to introduce 24/7 
2 Paypal Company Statistics, http://www.statisticbrain.com/paypal-statistics/.
3 Bloomberg, “Apple Sees Mobile-Payment Service Gaining in Challenge to PayPal”, 28 Janu-
ary 2015, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-01-27/apple-sees-mobile-payment-
service-gaining-in-challenge-to-paypal.6Introduct Ion6real-time bank account-to-account transfers in all the major jurisdictions. This shift, 
coupled with regulatory reform, will create opportunities for new players to enter the market and provide data aggregation services and payment initiation options to give life to the Internet of Things revolution.
The use of pre-paid cards is also on the rise. A 2012 report from MasterCard
4 
predicts that the market for so-called e-money (cards pre-loaded with cash) will be 
worth around £822 billion by 2017. If these numbers are impressive, they represent only the tip of the FinTech iceberg.
Borrowing and depositing is also undergoing something of a revolution, thanks in 
no small part to the emergence of P2P lending platforms. In the UK P2P lending emerged shortly before the financial crisis with the launch of Zopa in 2005. Other platforms such as Funding Circle and RateSetter followed. To date, the industry has lent a cumulative figure of £2.6 billion and the market is growing. Lending in the first quarter of 2015 came in at £459 million, an increase of one-third on the previous three months.
5 These figures are small when compared to the sums advanced by 
the big banks but it is a young and rapidly growing market.
Importantly, the P2P market not only provides businesses and private borrowers 
with a source of cash, it also offers investors and savers a place to deposit cash and earn higher interest rates than in a conventional bank account. Elsewhere, challenger banks – some of them digital only – are also moving in on the deposits market.
Some aspects of FinTech innovation remain well outside the mainstream. 
Digital currencies, such as bitcoin,
6 potentially offer an opportunity and means 
to exchange value, but most would agree that the real value will emerge from the application of the supporting distributed ledger technology. The use of the distributed ledger brings additional value in the recording of non-financial asset ownership and, coupled with digital currency, could provide a platform for future innovation to reduce costs and speed up transactions. Effective regulation of this environment is required to reduce risk for all participants.
Move away from the corporate face of FinTech innovation – PayPal, Apple, Google, 
et al. – and thousands of companies are working in technology hubs around the world on ways to make familiar activities such as stock trading or money transfers not only more convenient, but also more attuned to the way consumers use their smartphones, tablets, PCs, and smart watches. This wave of innovation is not only coming from established FinTech centres but also from emerging hubs. For example, Johannesburg has become a centre for bitcoin development, while across Africa entrepreneurs are developing mobile-based banking and payment systems appropriate to the local telecoms and financial services infrastructures.
7
The Challenge to the Banks
So how will financial institutions – and particularly the big banks – respond to this wave of FinTech innovation? The banking sector is vulnerable to disruption, partly as a result of recent history. Until the onset of the financial crisis, banks enjoyed a degree of public trust that was crucial to their brands. Although that trust hasn’t been entirely eliminated, it has certainly been eroded. As a study by the CCP Research Foundation revealed in June 2015, the world’s top sixteen global banks have, between them, incurred US$306 billion in conduct-related costs since 2010.
8
In contrast, the leading lights of the digital era tend to be viewed positively. Research carried out for the Millennial Disruption Index report found that 73% of respondents (teens to mid-thirties) would be much more excited about a new financial service delivered by Google or Apple than one announced by their incumbent bank.
9 In that respect, traditional financial service providers are at risk. 
Customers no longer necessarily see the bank as the default provider or first port of call – what’s out there in the market is more exciting. And what’s out there in the market is treading heavily on the toes of incumbents. So, while individuals and businesses will always need banking services, will they still need banks?
4 2012 Global Prepaid Sizing Study, commissioned by Mastercard: A look at the potential for 
global prepaid growth by 2017, https://www.partnersinprepaid.com/pdf/a-look-at-the-potential-
for-global-prepaid-growth-by-2017.pdf.
5 P2P Finance Association, “Strong Growth Continues in Peer-toPeer Lending Market”, 30 April 
2015, http://p2pfa.info/strong-growth-continues-in-peer-to-peer-lending-market.
6 For more information on crypto-currencies, blockchain technology, and bitcoin, see Part 9.7 For further insights regarding emerging and established FinTech hubs, see Part 3.
8 Financial Times, “Banks’ Post-Crisis Legal Costs Hit $300bn”, 8 June 2015, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/debe3f58-0bd8-11e5-a06e-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3eT1XUB4B.
9 Millennial Disruption Index, http://www.ritholtz.com/blog/2015/04/millennial-disruption-index/.
Introduct Ion7committees). This approach speaks to a generation raised on social media and 
these lenders regularly score high on customer satisfaction. Equally important, P2P sites have lower operating costs than banks and the capital requirements they face are also lower.
The Future for the Banking Sector
BBVA chairman and CEO Francisco González forecast in early 2015 that up to half of the world’s banks will disappear through the cracks opened up by digital disruption of the industry.
10 That may be so, but I would argue that the most 
forward-looking banks will not just survive the wave of digital disruption, but will thrive, as these FinTech-driven challengers gain momentum. The world’s major retail banks enjoy huge advantages, not least in terms of their collective customer base and the data they hold on their clients. These “thriver banks” will migrate the majority of their customers to their own digital banking services. They will reposition themselves in the value chain from being a provider of infrastructure and product, to being at the heart of the customer relationship in a secure and holistic digital environment. In effect, they will become financial app stores showcasing a range of financial solutions from different providers. In doing so, they remain relevant to customers as a single source for the best global financial solutions.
So, in the future, once I have logged into my mobile bank (presumably using heart 
biometrics or face recognition) I will be able to borrow money P2P via Ratesetter, make an international payment using Transferwise, top up my Starbucks e-wallet, or make a deposit into my Alibaba money market fund. In order to achieve such a goal, collaboration will have to become the norm. Corporate incumbents can’t match the speed to market and the ability to innovate that the best FinTech developers bring to the table. So, rather than trying to reinvent the wheel by developing their own solutions, banks will have to work with innovators to bring new services to their consumers.
From start-ups working in shared spaces in London’s Tech City or Johannesburg, to 
the corporate giants such as Apple and Google, FinTech is a dynamic sector. But while market leaders have emerged, no one really knows where the next successful payment system or bitcoin wallet will come from. And for all those ideas that make it to the market, many others will fail. The services that succeed will be those that At the most simple level, retail banks provide three crucial functions, namely:
•	They take deposits and provide customers with a secure place to store cash and 
earn interest, backed by deposit insurance and significant regulation.
•	They facilitate payments through a range of systems, including cash, cards, and transfers.
•	They lend money.
To a financial services agnostic the same services can be provided by the new generation of technology-driven challengers. In terms of retail banking, money can be deposited with challenger banks, placed in pre-paid cards, stored in PayPal accounts, invested in bitcoins, or invested through P2P lending sites.
Credit is available from challenger banks and alternative lenders (including P2P), 
and customers have an increasing choice of payment options, including PayPal, e-wallets, and phone-based systems. While many of these options still use the plumbing of the banking system, in the medium term we may see payment and foreign exchange mechanisms that completely bypass the incumbent banking systems.
The Utilities Risk
So the major risk for the incumbents is that they come to be perceived as utilities that do little more than supply the infrastructure while the FinTech companies take the credit for providing innovative consumer-friendly services – and ultimately own the customer relationship. When this happens, the brand equity of banks will surely take a hit.
Unlike the major banks who are often constrained by legacy IT systems and 
operating models, the new players have designed their digital services from the ground up to meet the needs of specific customer groups. FinTech challengers can be both agile and completely focused on positive customer outcomes.
While traditional banks are dealing with increasing layers of compliance, consumer 
protection, and their own bureaucratic structures, P2Ps have a transparent approach to borrowing and lending, based on disclosure by the company seeking credit, and assessment by the community of lenders (rather than faceless credit 
10 Half of the world’s banks set to fall by the digital wayside – BBVA, http://www.finextra.com/
news/fullstory.aspx?newsitemid=26965.8Introduct Ion8genuinely make life easier, perhaps by mixing FinTech with other technologies. 
The bank of the future could be a place to deposit not just your money, but other valuables – for example, your medical records, your will, or the biometric data used to start your car.With their customer base and experience in securely handling data, banks are in an ideal position to create holistic customer solutions that combine financial services with a wider range of digital offers. It could be the key to their future prosperity.
Introduct Ion9Why We’re so Excited About 
FinTech
By Rébecca Menat 
Director of Communications, The Assets
Banks are not exciting – FinTech is. Why should we be excited about the global 
FinTech sector?
Here is some background information for novice readers: FinTech means “financial 
technology”. It encompasses a new wave of companies changing the way people pay, send money, borrow, lend, and invest. The most disrupted sectors – or at least the ones that we hear the most about – are payments and money transfer, with TransferWise (money transfer), Square (mobile payments), crowdfunding (Kickstarter, Crowdcube, Smart Angels …), and peer-to-peer lending (LendingClub, Zopa, Prêt d’Union …) increasingly becoming household names and products. So where is all this exciting activity taking place? London is clearly the leading FinTech hub, followed by New York, and other cities fighting to get to the top: Paris, Hong Kong, Singapore, Tel Aviv … Just to give you an idea, FinTech investments reached $22 billion (including $4 billion insurance) in 2015 and are expected to increase significantly, so there is room for new players!
How Did it all Begin?
The birth and rise of FinTech is deeply rooted in the financial crisis, and the erosion of trust it generated. People’s anger at the banking system was the perfect breeding ground for financial innovation. Good timing, because digital natives (a.k.a. millennials) were becoming old enough to be potential customers and their preferences pointed to the mobile services they understood and mastered, instead of bankers they could not relate to. In this favourable landscape, FinTech providers came in, offering new and fresh services at lower costs, through well-designed platforms or mobile apps.
To sum it up, FinTech companies offer trust, transparency, and technology. 
Responding to a trust crisis towards banks, start-ups are able to offer services at a lower cost in a more transparent way, through easy-to-use interfaces. The customer is king and there is no one who knows their customers better than youthful, edgy start-ups, often drawn from the ranks of the millennial generation itself.More than a Fuss: What Does 
FinTech Bring?
In four simple words, FinTech means: “Power to the People!” Take money transfers 
for instance. By allowing transparency and cutting middlemen fees, FinTech start-ups enable individuals to have control over their own money. End-users know how much they pay, and incidentally, this is less than what they used to pay. This innovation is actually having a really big social impact,
1 as there are start-ups 
specializing in a certain kind of money transfers: remittances (money sent by foreign workers to their home country). WorldRemit and Remitly are attracting serious attention, having respectively raised $100 million and $12.5 million in funding. This is not surprising, as they are entering a market worth more than $600 billion a year.
Another way of empowering people is to provide them with … money. The financial 
crisis not only resulted in a lack of trust towards banks – it also made it more difficult for people to take out loans. Peer-to-peer lending has broadened the availability of financing, enabling people and businesses to borrow money more easily, faster, and in a more transparent way. These FinTech start-ups have applied disintermediation to credit, connecting buyers and sellers through marketplaces. At the forefront of this trend stands Lending Club which raised almost $900 million in one of the largest IPOs of 2014.
FinTech is also widening access to investment opportunities, through 
crowdfunding.
2 Let us not forget that equity investment was once restricted 
to wealthy individuals. It is now accessible to all! If you have a small amount to invest, you can still have an impact and potentially reap some benefits. Kickstarter, Indiegogo, Crowdcube … just scroll down and choose your project. We already seem to be accustomed to this sector of FinTech, and tend to forget how revolutionary it is. Robo advisors are also shaking up the investment world, extending financial advice to just everybody.
3 According to a report by consulting 
firm A.T. Kearney, these automated investment services will manage about $2 trillion in the US by 2020, accounting for 5.6% of Americans’ investment assets.
4
1 For additional insights on the social impact of FinTech, see Part 4.
2 For further information on crowdfunding and the impact of FinTech on other sectors, see Part 6.
3 See Part 6 for more information of FinTech influencing investment and capital trends.
4 See http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/18/investing/robo-advisor-millennials-wealthfront/.1010
Introduct IonGenerally – and I think this is the biggest revolution – FinTech is providing access 
to information, that once belonged to a select few, to an ever-increasing pool of people. In our “information economy” age, that is a big democratic move.
FinTech in the Developing World: 
Starting from Scratch5
John Chaplin, a payments industry veteran, gathered a bunch of experts to 
generate insights into the state of the FinTech industry: their conclusions are assembled in The Payments Innovation Jury Report.
6 Among various questions 
they asked themselves: which region will show the most payments innovation over the next 24 months? Verdict: FinTech innovation will come from Asia for the most part, followed by Africa, North America, Latin America, and eventually Europe. The reason is quite intuitive: the lack of infrastructure in developing countries leaves room for innovation that would not find success in over-banked and heavily entrenched economies in the West. As one of the report’s contributors perfectly sums up, “the developing world is not bound by existing legacy systems, business models or customer behaviors and as such offers a fresher perspective that can often see beyond the scope of established business models.”
7
In addition, whereas FinTech services in developed countries are focused on online customers, start-ups in developing countries are addressing a broader market: cell phone users. According to the International Telecommunications Union, an estimated 95.5% of the world’s population have access to a cell phone – which gives SMS a greater impact than the internet. Mobile money transfer services such as M-Pesa have made major contributions in changing the economic situation of underbanked populations in Bangladesh and Kenya. In Bangladesh the M-Pesa equivalent is bKash which is focused on mass-market mobile financial services. While Bangladesh offers a strong micro-finance industry (small-scale unsecured credit), bKash works like M-Pesa, sending payments quickly and easily to others.
8In 2013, International Finance Corporation (IFC), a member of the World Bank Group, became an equity partner in bKash and in 2014, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation also invested in bKash to ensure access to a broader range of financial services for the low-income masses of Bangladesh to achieve broader financial inclusion.
9
Looking at the impact of FinTech solutions in Africa it is important to keep in mind that in sixteen African markets, there are now more mobile money accounts than bank accounts.
Thus, FinTech in developing countries is not only about making existing services 
more convenient: it is creating new infrastructure, and providing for greater inclusion of millions of people in the real economy. Since the markets addressed are enormous – and admittedly represent huge potential opportunities – one can truly say that FinTech is “changing the world for the better”.
Banks, Beware!
FinTech has already unveiled many “disruptions”, and is probably keeping many more under its belt. Is there enough space for these innovative new entrants and traditional institutions alike? What are the concrete threats to the latter?
“People need banking, but they don’t necessarily need banks,” Heather Cox, 
Citi’s Chief Client Experience, Digital, and Marketing Officer said during IBM InterConnect 2015. New and more convenient and customer-centric services are changing the landscape, while customers are becoming more demanding. No bank can deny this: the proliferation of niche players focusing on certain services makes it more and more difficult for traditional financial institutions to keep ownership of their customers. The time when financial institutions could bundle their services together without transparency and still enjoy full loyalty from their customers, is coming to an end. Admittedly, this phenomenon only applies to a certain generation in certain areas, and even most of my “millennial” peers are still using their bank’s services for all of their financial operations. We are not there yet. Actually, this is probably just the beginning of what is forecast to be a financial revolution.
5 For further information of the applicability of FinTech solutions to emerging markets and their 
social impact, see Part 4.
6 Currency Cloud, “The Insider’s View to Payments and Fintech”, 2015, https://www.currency-
cloud.com/payments-innovation-2015.
7 Ibid.
8 Source: http://www.totalpayments.org/2014/08/05/bkash-bangladeshs-m-pesa/.9 Source: http://www.bkash.com/about/company-profile.11Introduct IonYes, the big players will need to abide by start-ups’ rules, in some ways. But 
this may actually be beneficial. What is better than having someone inventing everything right in front of you, and allowing you to just buy it? This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for banks to obtain advanced capabilities and modernize inefficient infrastructure without having to develop it in-house. In other words, it only requires an open innovation mind-set for banks to join the game.
In this context, different scenarios can be imagined. In its report entitled The 
Future of Fintech and Banking: Digitally disrupted or reimagined?
10 Accenture 
details what it considers to be the most probable ones. Scenario 1: banks 
continue to believe in the supremacy of their business model and fail to adapt, hence losing out to new players. Scenario 2: they understand the importance of customer experience and embrace innovation within their business model, mainly collaborating with new entrants. The second option seems far more likely, now that banks are expressing their awareness and laying their cards on the table. Let us hope this will result in many win-win situations for the financial service sector and its global customers.In his annual letter to shareholders in April 2015, JP Morgan’s CEO Jamie Dimon raised the alarm: “There are hundreds of start-ups with a lot of brains and money working on various alternatives to traditional banking.” In spite of the apparent hegemony of these large establishments, more and more traditional institutions are becoming conscious of the threat innovative players represent. Would it be a smart move to try and beat them? Nothing is less certain. Start-ups have certain advantages over financial behemoths. Their small size, lean culture, technological progress, and ability to attract top talent give them a competitive advantage that is inherent in their very nature.
Disrupted, Reimagined
You know what they say: if you can’t beat them, join them. The smartest move is to collaborate, not to compete – and many banks have understood this. They are creating incubators (Barclays’ accelerator), setting up specialized venture funds (Santander’s Innoventures), creating partnerships (Metro Bank and Zopa), or simply acquiring start-ups. Strategies differ but the goal remains the same: survive, and even profit from the digital disruption.
10 Accenture, “The Future of Fintech and Banking: Digitally disrupted or reimagined?” 
http://www.fintechinnovationlablondon.net/media/730274/Accenture-The-Future-of-Fintech- 
and-Banking-digitallydisrupted-or-reima-.pdf.1212
Introduct IonCurrent Trends in Financial 
Technology
By Alexandre Glas
Co-Founder and CMO, The Assets
and Marcin Truszel 
CEO, Kontomatik
For a very long time now banks have had to compete primarily with other banks. 
These were the times of mass branch openings, bold marketing campaigns, and ongoing competition for the highest interest paying accounts. In 2015 FinTech became not just “a” buzzword but, arguably, “the” buzzword and this shows no signs of changing. Now direct competitive pressure for banks is not only coming from other banks, but from thousands of FinTech start-ups and powerful tech giants with enough capital to cherry pick the most interesting areas of banking to leverage their own business models and millions of customers.
For decades, universal banks have been serving the full scope of financial 
services. In most countries, competition in the banking sector was moderate, since the bulk of jurisdictions had just a few large banks that accounted for quite a large share of the market. It was thus rarely possible to see a bank that had grown from a small one to a large industry player. While banks try to offer a wide scope of services, there are many innovative FinTech companies that just focus on the development of one simple service with great user experience. This certainly makes the lives of banks harder, as it is simply impossible for a large organization to achieve sustainable growth in every niche of the financial services sector. This development refers to the “unbundling” trend, meaning that FinTech firms focus on distinct areas of banking with the goal to become the “best of breed” providers in these areas. Therefore on an aggregate level there is a danger that the banking service offering overall is “unbundled” by the best FinTech providers in each category.
While the residents of developed countries certainly enjoy doing their banking 
activities from the comfort of their homes with the benefit of online banking, we can still see that online banking is not widely present or not present at all in emerging markets. However emerging markets will experience quite rapid growth 
1 Source: https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/data-sharing-and-open-data-in-banking-
call-for-evidence/call-for-evidence-on-data-sharing-and-open-data-in-banking. The application 
program interface is a set of routines, protocols, and tools for building software applications. The API specifies how software components should interact. See the chapter entitled “Embrac-ing the Connected API Economy” for further detail about APIs.and substantial improvement in financial services provision. This process should 
take substantially less time than it took developed markets to achieve. This will be quite a similar scenario to what has already happened with the development of internet networks in such countries. While residents of developed countries have been steadily moving from one type of connection to another, it is not at all unusual to see developing countries quickly jump from a common 56k modem to high-speed wireless connections straight away. In other words, developing countries tend to start and stay on the low-end technology for longer than developed countries; however, they then skip many stages and quickly adopt the most developed product.
Regulation Supporting the  
FinTech Sector
2015 began with exciting news coming from the United Kingdom, where the 
government announced the initiation of a data sharing and open data initiative in banking (open Application Programming Interface (API) initiative).
1 UK officials are 
planning to implement a detailed framework for an open banking data environment that can be used by banks and FinTech companies to collaborate more for the benefit of their customers. The objective is to boost competition for the benefit of consumers. This is an important step, as thanks to the influence from the UK government many innovative organizations could get access to financial data going forward.
Another important piece of legislation in Europe is the Payment Services Directive 
2 (PSD II). Although the whole analysis of PSD II is rather complex and beyond the scope of this chapter, in summary the European Parliament also wants to see easier access to banking data to enable innovation while at the same time preventing any data misuse and security breaches.13Introduct IonWearables, Foreign Exchange (FX), 
Bitcoin, and Blockchain Trends
Having reviewed regulation trends, we now want to highlight key applications of 
FinTech. In the foreign exchange sector, services like WeSwap2 are entrants into 
the currency exchange market, but they are doing things quite differently from the traditional money exchanges – WeSwap actually allows people from different countries to interact and exchange local currency at a pre-determined local rate, far cheaper than the commission traditional money exchange businesses place on exchanges. WeSwap is backed by MasterCard
3 and is expected to grow 
exponentially over the next 18 months.
Although not yet commonplace, smart wearables are set to revolutionize the 
banking industry. The forecast for shipping wearables in 2015 is 45.7m units4 and 
this is only going to increase. The Apple watch already allows the wearer to check their banking balance, track their transaction history, and find a nearby branch – once the mobile banking transaction systems are expanded and improved, the functionality of these smart wearables will only increase further. Jeremy Mugridge, Marketing Director at Instinct Studios is quoted as saying, “wearables have been around for a while now, but we’re likely to see this gain momentum after the release of Apple Watch. 2015 will be the year where we’ll see a shift in focus from health and fitness towards other areas like people’s financial health.”
5 For those of you 
who doubt that smart wearables will become that popular, take a glance at your smartphone and think back 10 years.
It is perhaps no coincidence that after the economic crisis, driven in part by banks, 
consumers are now paying closer attention to their own finances than ever before. Indeed, several apps have been created to allow consumers to do just that – one app, called Spendific, connects to a user’s bank account and, after taking into account all of their outgoings, states what is left to spend. This is updated in real time as purchases and payments are made from that account. This innovation, though, is comparatively basic when compared to MoneyHub, who have developed an app that does something similar, but also includes long-term savings in the financial planning process. Things like buying a house and desired retirement age are included and different scenarios can be created to see what impact the consumer’s decisions will have on their financial outlook.
More and more financial services provision is being conducted online and as 
Generation Z (the demographic segment born after millennials) will only ever know “mobile”, it should come as no surprise that this is and will continue to be the case. Smart wearables, specifically technologically advanced financial apps and an increase in mobile payment opportunities, are the result of consumer demand.
Although they are taking a somewhat slow foothold, there are clear signs that 
crypto-currencies are here to stay – for example, California made them legal tender in 2015.
6 In Europe some countries are already seeing bitcoin – an example 
of a crypto-currency – take hold in bartering-type exchange systems. Arguably, there is not yet a bitcoin usage model quite where the industry needs it to be, but this will be developed over time. However, the development of all of this could be hindered by regulations and national laws. Seen from an idealistic viewpoint, people would be able to use bitcoin, or other crypto-currencies, anywhere in the world, instantaneously. Yet, with different rules and regulations governing states and the different financial institutions involved, getting unanimous agreement on how crypto-currencies should work could prove difficult.
In this respect, blockchain (the technology on which bitcoin is based) is a 
distributed data store that holds a public ledger of transactions for crypto-currencies, such as bitcoin itself. A dedicated chapter in the book covers crypto-currencies and blockchain technology.
It is clear that FinTech has already made huge inroads into many aspects of 
our daily lives. What is perhaps even clearer is that the surface has barely been scratched in relation to what FinTech can do for us all in the future. As we consumers become ever more demanding and discerning in our choices, you can 
2 See https://www.weswap.com/en/.
3 See https://www.weswap.com/en/learn-more/.
4 Ibid., and see http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25519615.
5 “FinTech Trends and Predictions for 2015”, 14 January 2015, http://www.bobsguide.com/
guide/news/2015/Jan/14/fintech-trends-and-predictions-for-2015.html.6 “Cryptocurrencies made legal in California”, 8 January 2015, http://www
.bobsguide.com/guide/news/2015/Jan/8/cryptocurrencies-made-legal-in-california 
.html.1414
Introduct Ionexpect to see financial institutions rely increasingly on FinTech developments to 
provide the solutions to keep us happy and meet our needs.
In summary, we are now living in times of significant transformation of the 
banking sector. We can probably assume that banking over the next 10 years will experience a higher degree of change than in the last 100 years. Financial technology innovation has started a global shake-up of the sector. Now the most important question remains: will banks be able to successfully embrace FinTech innovation or not? FinTech is set to play a bigger role in your life than you might have ever expected.
15Introduct IonFinTech 
Themes2After the introduction to the financial technology sector in the previous 
part, this second part focuses on some key general themes. The chapters highlight the importance of collaboration between the established players and the FinTech start-ups while providing a global overview on regulatory frameworks impacting FinTech. Regulatory compliance is a prerequisite for success for FinTech companies worldwide. Marketplace lending – one of the key disruptive FinTech business models is also explained in more detail here.
As we all tend to live increasingly digital lives, we have several 
identities online. The topic of identity management, particularly important for FinTech, is covered here. The threat of tech giants to incumbents, as companies such as Apple and Facebook have entered the global payments arena, is also highlighted.
Finally, principles and the importance of good design are 
discussed to ensure that the user experience of financial products and services is what the customer expects, based on their interaction with the leading consumer and technology solutions.financial technology APIs to create a bespoke solution where the development team 
can integrate the functionality of the APIs as part of their technology. For example, banks and payments firms can send money internationally through Currency Cloud’s API, rather than having to develop proprietary technology.
The flexibility of APIs means that it is also easier to create experiences that users 
will enjoy because the experience can be easily decoupled from the system behind it. Barclays’ development of mobile payment service Pingit is a great example of this where opening their API has helped in bringing a successful new service to market. Pingit has experienced extraordinary growth since launch in 2012, with users in London alone sending more than £60 million via Pingit in the first six months of 2014.
Despite the scale of innovation sweeping across the financial services industry, 
many banks still retain their R&D behind closed doors. Understandably, security is one of their top priorities and rather than risk sharing information with another party, banks tend to only trust themselves. While this means that the threat from the outside is limited, it also means that there can be no external development. And we just need to look as far as the success stories from Apple and Google, who routinely open up their APIs to outside creative minds, to understand just how valuable and exciting the results of the latter can be.
Developed in a pre-internet era, banks’ business models and technology 
infrastructure has largely been constructed around product sets and delivered through the branch. In other words, banks were not built to serve today’s fast-paced and digitally savvy customers. As such, a whole host of technology players have taken the opportunity to develop innovative alternatives, built on flexible platforms that can adapt to this changing environment. PayPal is one of the first notable examples of a successful solution that provided great benefit for the customer and since then has paved the way for an explosion of alternative services, offering everything from investments to international payments, loans, and bank accounts. From the likes of Kickstarter and Seedr, which have been leading the crowdfunding market for some time, to Amigo which provides personalized credit approval, and Transferwise which offers consumers cheaper access to overseas transfers, these firms are redefining old verticals or creating entirely new ones.
Yet, the rise of FinTech newcomers in the industry does not need to send 
banks panicking about the challenges involved with overhauling their entire IT Banks Need to Think 
Collaboration Rather Than Competition
By Rachel Nienaber 
VP Engineering, Currency Cloud
Historically, banks have been responsible for most innovations in the financial 
industry. The inception of the credit card in the 1950s and ATMs in the 1970s completely revolutionized the way we access and pay for goods. Jump forward to 2016 and it is a very different story. Those developments came decades apart, but following the significant growth and accessibility of the internet and the technology that advances in its wake – including smart phones, big data, social media, and cloud computing – demand has come from consumers to make it even easier to manage their finances. As such, financial innovation is no longer restricted to those institutions, allowing outside players to creep in to shake up the industry.
The financial sector has continued to witness many impressive innovations and 
technological advancements such as contactless technology, digital wallets, and crypto-currencies. However the innovators are now rarely banks but small FinTech firms. These are often led by former bank employees who have identified a gap in an existing offering or service.
Application Programming Interface (API) is the term used to describe a set of tools 
that enable different software components or systems to effectively communicate with one another.
1 Using an API, banks or challenger financial services providers can 
incorporate the technology from FinTech firms into the key areas in which support is required – simplifying the process of adding innovative technology services by piecing together building blocks of flexible services, much like financial lego.
With financial lego APIs, IT leaders within businesses can create their own financial 
IT solution or support other internal processes without having to build every piece of the technology from scratch. Instead, they can mix and match a portfolio of 
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.20
FinTech The Mes20infrastructure in order to compete. The “us versus them” debate that has gained 
perpetual popularity does not provide an accurate picture of the relationship between FinTech innovators and banks. Let us be very clear, the banks are the cornerstone on which our economies are built, they are the rails on which most FinTech firms operate and they are not going away in the near or even the distant future. However, we are creating a fundamentally different way of viewing and approaching the industry.
Tech start-ups look at this financial services landscape and using the rationality 
of the internet, see poor customer service and room for tremendous efficiencies. The same logic has been applied in other industries such as music and telecommunications, which have also been completely transformed by the power of new technologies and the internet. What a traditional bank might view as a threat in the digital age, their more nimble counterparts might see as an opportunity. The result is a wave of FinTech firms that look to optimize particular segments of the financial value chain (whether that be international money transfers, loans, or payment processing) and offer their specialist services to other businesses and banks, via APIs. A company that wanted to support musicians could, for example, use one technology firm such as Kickstarter to provide loans, and another firm such as Currency Cloud to make the payment. The success of these players is in part due to their ability to focus on a very niche segment of the industry, rather than trying to compete on all levels. Banks on the other hand, have always tried to own every aspect of the financial services spectrum, yet this is where they are now struggling as alternative players offer up more sophisticated services for customers within a specific niche.
Despite their differences, both FinTech players and banks have much to gain 
from working together. FinTech firms can benefit from the long history of banking operations and the foundation that banks provide. They are a vital part of the puzzle as the banks provide the financial instruments that FinTech firms package up in different ways, at the same time concentrating on one specific use case at a time. Banks can simultaneously gain value in new players – whether that means looking to partner with them or acquire their advanced technology offerings. Using API capabilities delivered in this way can help banks to expand services internationally, reduce development costs, and unlock fresh revenue without having to invest in and build new architecture.
The growth of FinTech and push for open access to financial data has been noted 
industry-wide as the government continues its support of FinTech firms and the development of the UK as the world’s most exciting financial hub. It is not all that surprising that they have recently announced plans to create a consolidated, open API standard for banks. The government has committed to launch a call for evidence on how best to deliver an open standard for APIs in UK banking and to ask whether more open data in banking could benefit consumers. While the start of this process has been to discuss the product banks offer, what FinTech firms are really interested in is the next step: opening up the transactional data from within a bank. Banks, however, are still very cautious about giving outside developers access to this type of data and it will take many more discussions before such a move becomes a reality. It may not have been the strides that we had all originally hoped for when we heard about the open standard but at least it is a very good start. This is an encouraging step forward for the industry. We have already seen how nurturing the API economy can provide the industry with a large dose of innovation, and with further support it will undoubtedly continue to produce new opportunities for both banks and the up-and-coming alternative players in this industry. With the UK government putting their faith in these successful newcomers to take the industry forward into the 21st century, this further indicates that alternative players have done a successful job of proving their value to the industry – and such credibility will continue to grow.
There is much to gain from FinTech firms and traditional banks embarking on a 
collaborative relationship to discover and define the future growth potential within the industry. We strongly believe in working with, rather than against, the banks and we are in no doubt that collaboration with forward-thinking technology firms will ensure that the finance industry continues to innovate.
FinTech The Mes21Global Compliance is Key
By Jan C. Wendenburg 
Member, Executive Board, XCOMpetence AG
We love great FinTechs, like PayPal, Apple Pay, and Stripe. We love to see them 
rise. We love using them. But we would all dump them within a second if they were to fail – fail to be trusted, fail to be secure, or fail to comply with local financial regulations. Compliance with legal financial regulations is not optional, but mandatory. It is mandatory for each FinTech to build a secure, trustworthy service, regardless of geography and legislation. Almost every nation has its own individual financial regulation based on its distinct culture, financial system, and historical experiences.
If you have launched your FinTech company but disregarded compliance for your 
service, you may well be shut down by supervisory authorities, resulting in potential reputational damage and associated costs needed to rectify them. If you over-comply with regulations, you will not move forward fast enough and be ousted by the competition. Are there any shortcuts to compliance?
FinTechs Must Understand Each 
Local Regulatory Stack!
If you want to bypass industry incumbents, you must understand the rules of 
the game. While FinTechs are trying to bypass major players, they cannot begin attacking them unless they understand the regulatory landscape and quickly learn how to use regulation and legal specialties to their advantage.
A key rule is that you should never try to bypass regulation. It’s much better to 
embrace it as a core function of your organization. If you take care of regulation and compliance from the start, you will be in a stronger position from the very beginning instead of having to play catch up. It’s like customer acquisition: it pays big dividends down the line. Think twice about what your organization does and how you intend to structure your compliance. Do you really see regulation and compliance as part of your organization, your life, and the DNA of your start-up? What are you doing today regarding regulatory compliance? Do you know how financial regulation works throughout the most important regions around the world?The United States: A Single 
Market with Complex, Multi-level Regulations
Let us first take a look at financial regulation in the United States, which is highly 
fragmented compared to European and Asian countries, where most jurisdictions have only one bank regulator. In the US, banking is regulated at both the federal and the state level. Depending on the type of charter a banking organization has, and on its organizational structure, it may be subject to numerous federal and state banking regulations.
This structure makes life complex for FinTechs in the United States. For example, 
if you want to provide investment management and advice, like Wealthfront in Palo Alto, CA, you will have to specify first which state law may apply to a particular client. Beyond that, you will not be allowed to serve international clients, unless you implement international anti-money laundering procedures and handle cross-border tax issues properly. As a result it may be easier to open international offices within other countries instead and serve local clients within the regulatory framework.
If you want to launch something in the lending space, like Lending Club in San 
Francisco, CA, you will have your marketplace of lenders and investors at the bottom. On top of that, in increasing order of difficulty and market breadth, you will have US state-level legislators, then US federal regulators, NASAA, then the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC). Once you succeed here, and want to serve European lenders and investors, you will have to open European or Asian offices and must follow their local regulations.
Europe: Still Complex but with 
Some Harmonized Regulations
In 2014 Europe implemented the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), which 
is intended to harmonize the different national financial regulations within the 27 European member states. Within each country, a National Competent Authority (NCA) supervises national banks and financial service providers. If you want to expand into other European countries, you will have to work with the local NCAs and their respective regulations, i.e. in the UK the Prudential Regulation Authority 2222
FinTech The Mes(PRA), which oversees about 1,700 banks and financial service providers, and in 
France the Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR), both based on a similar regulatory and legal stack as Germany.
Asia: Remains Very Fragmented
Going to Asia, you may want to focus only on China and India – the rest of Asia is very fragmented and mainly focuses on what the two major Asian countries are doing. China’s financial system is highly regulated and has recently started to liberalize itself as China’s financial policy becomes more significant to its overall economic strategy. As a result, banks and financial service providers are becoming more important to China’s economy by providing increasing amounts of finance to enterprises for investment, seeking deposits, and lending money to the government. The People’s Bank of China is the largest bank in China and acts as the Treasury. It also issues currency, monitors money supply, regulates monetary organizations, and formulates monetary policy for the State Council. The Bank of China manages foreign exchange transactions and foreign exchange reserves. The China Development Bank distributes foreign capital from a variety of sources, and the China International Trust and Investment Corporation (CITIC), previously a financial organization that smoothed the inflow of foreign funds, is now a full-fledged bank, allowed to compete for foreign investment funds with the Bank of China. The China Construction Bank lends funds for capital construction projects from the state budget, and finally the Agricultural Bank of China functions as a lending and deposit-taking institution for the agricultural sector.
By the end of 2014, the Chinese government had adopted new regulations 
requiring 75% of all technology products used by Chinese financial institutions to be classified as “secure and controllable” by 2019. This means suppliers and service providers will be forced to turn over their secret source code to Chinese auditors to enable invasive governmental audits to detect back doors into hardware and software. This rule applies to all financial institutions and their suppliers providing financial services in China, making competition pretty hard for foreign companies.
In India the regulation and supervision of the financial system has a complex multi-
level architecture undertaken by different regulatory authorities. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) regulates and supervises the major part of the financial system. The supervisory role of the RBI covers commercial banks, urban co-operative banks (UCBs), some financial institutions, and non-banking finance companies (NBFCs). Regional Rural Banks, the co-operative banks, and housing finance companies are supervised by the National Housing Bank (NHB). Through the Department of Company Affairs (DCA), the Government of India regulates deposit-taking activities of corporates, other than NBFCs. The Indian capital market, mutual funds, and other capital market intermediaries are regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI); the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) regulates the insurance sector; and the Pension Funds Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) regulates pension funds.
In 2011 only about 35% of Indians over the age of 15 held an account at a formal 
financial institution.
1 After a failed initiative to connect each household with a bank 
account, the ADHAR initiative issued 770 unique identities (UID), a cornerstone for easy mobile SIM card registration and mobile money. Promoted by the PMJDY campaign, today about 99.7% of households are connected to a bank account. Driven by this huge success, the Indian RBI committee started to accept applications from companies for a specialized banking licence – a payment-only bank licence, subject to regulatory scrutiny and clearance, it was granted to first applicants in late 2015.
Payment Services are Globally 
Regulated
Adding payment services to your portfolio will trigger another set of strict 
regulations. To prevent money laundering, payment services in general, including P2P, P2B, and B2B services, are heavily regulated by governments almost everywhere. The FATF (Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering), an international joint organization of more than 34 member countries located at the global OECD offices in Belgium, issued in 2012 a comprehensive framework against money laundering and the financing of terrorism. This internationally accepted framework has been converted into very specific national money transfer regulations, which are essential when operating an international or global money transfer or payment service.
1 Source: The World Bank; See also Raymond Zhong, “India Launches Program Giving 
Poor Access to Bank Accounts”, The Wall Street Journal, 28 April 2014, available at http://
www.wsj.com/articles/india-government-launches-program-giving-poor-access-to-bank-accounts-1409234530.23FinTech The MesEurope implemented the Directive on Payment Services (PSD), to provide the legal 
framework for the creation of an EU-wide single market for payments. The PSD, recently updated to PSD2, aims to establish a modern and comprehensive set of rules applicable to all payment services in the European Union. The target is to make cross-border payments as easy, efficient, and secure as “national” payments within a Member State. The PSD also seeks to improve competition by opening up payment markets to new entrants, thus fostering greater efficiency and cost reduction. At the same time, the Directive provides the necessary legal platform for the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA).
In the US, on 26 January 2015 the Federal Reserve System issued the federal 
“Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System”, which represents a multi-faceted plan for collaborating with payment system stakeholders including large and small businesses, emerging payments firms, card networks, payment processors, consumers, and financial institutions to enhance the speed, safety and efficiency of the US payment system. This document includes multi-level regulations and comments to ISO 20022 to improve the efficiency and security of national and cross-border payments.
Local and Global Compliance – 
Make, Buy, or Partner?
Each FinTech, each service, each level, and each geography has its own set of 
rules and you must implement a strategy for how you might use regulation to your advantage at every stage of your FinTech’s expansion and development. The way you manage the process at each stage will have substantial implications for later stages. You may need to exchange a suboptimal customer experience or fast growth, for example, to gain regulatory approval en route to providing a better customer experience and faster growth later.Even something as simple as regulation in a specific geography must be carefully considered. For example, where you choose to base your start-up is one of the most important decisions that you will make. There may be local, national, and international laws that can support (or damage) your business model and it is up to you to find them. Global examples of problems abound, like Uber entering a market regardless of legal and industry-specific regulations, resulting in many regulatory and union challenges at a local level in several countries and cities around the world. Others, like PayPal, first carefully investigated the regulatory ecosystem in each region, launched a very basic “ebay payment service”, and then expanded into other areas, i.e. P2P payments, after knowing exactly how to comply with each regulation for each service in each jurisdiction. Having a revenue stream originating in the jurisdiction also helped.
If you have got multi-million or billion-dollar funding for a global business, you may 
have the funds to buy any advice that you may need from local or global consultant firms. For FinTech start-ups, it might not be a bad idea partnering with medium-sized, flexible local bank heroes, and be guided by some experienced experts. Throughout all geographies (China is a more complex story), there are some great and powerful banks specializing in FinTech backbone services, e.g. Barclays (UK), biw-Bank & Fidor (Germany), mBank (Poland), Santander (Spain), Toronto-Domion (Canada), Westpac Banking Corp. (Australia), and many others. For a fee they will take care of much of the relevant regulatory stuff so that you can concentrate on your core business.
Regardless of any purchased advice or great partnership, please keep in mind 
that you will never be able to outsource or delegate regulatory compliance. If compliance becomes part of your company, your life, and your DNA, it will be one of your key success factors.2424
FinTech The MesLending (Capital) in the 21st 
Century
By Rodolfo Gonzalez 
Partner, Foundation Capital
Finance seems too big. Certainly, some banks are still too big to fail. But what if 
finance is not big enough yet? Financial services are highly concentrated. Much as the wealthiest 1% of households control 20% of income in the United States, the distribution of consumer financial services can be viewed in the same way — but on a global scale. Right now, only 50% of people worldwide have a savings account
1 
and just 20% have access to a loan product from a financial institution. There are roughly five billion people that banks do not serve today. More than anything, finance is poorly distributed.
It is staggering to think how banking – one of the oldest, most powerful, and 
most globalized industries – remains elusive for four-fifths of humankind. It is also telling that banks have not figured out how to profit from lending to those other five billion people (while still alienating plenty of their actual customers by way of poor service). Last year, in Foundation Capital’s white paper, it was predicted that new marketplace lending platforms would originate $1 trillion in loans within the decade
2 – but what if the actual potential is even larger? Lending holds the highest 
transformative potential for those excluded from banking services. After all, it is through credit that money is created in the modern economy.
Data and New Technologies are the 
Key to Unlocking Credit Globally
In the US, the ability to open a bank account, get a credit card, or obtain a loan to 
start building a life or business all hinge upon the approval of credit bureau data. Lending Club has built a multibillion-dollar business by accurately pricing the risk of borrowers that were overcharged by credit card operators. Emerging lending platforms are finding new ways to bypass and best FICO – the “gold standard” of credit bureaus. In the developed world, banks have been sitting on (and not utilizing) a wealth of available data that would improve their loan origination decisions. Banks need to become smarter just to catch up with the underwriting capabilities of new marketplace lending platforms. The very same data problem also hurts non-bank lenders. At the lower end of the spectrum, most payday lenders refuse to report the repayment history of their clients to bureaus, as they fear graduating them into lower interest loans.
Even when you have a privately owned repository of repayment data, as you do with 
credit bureaus in the US, it is incredibly expensive to access it. A hard pull from a single US credit bureau costs a lender between $1 and $2 at scale, depending on their size. While that works fine for an auto loan or mortgage where underwriting is done only a few times within a consumer’s lifetime, it is entirely uneconomical to do so on a regular basis – like an adjustable rate revolving loan or for small loan amounts (“Can you lend me a few dollars? This 6-month old printout shows I have a good FICO score!”).
Across the world, the challenge is that most countries have no credit bureaus, and 
of those who have them, they only tend to report negative payment behaviour (as opposed to positive and negative behaviour and a numerical score). Even then, coverage is patchy, as most of the population is not even listed in the credit bureau databases. Most utility and bill payments are not captured or reported. Many organizations still carry out a lot of the data collection by hand.
Underwriting based on behavioural data, using machine learning, neural networks, 
and other advanced statistical techniques, will provide the scalability required for financial institutions to offer more to those still without access. Mobile phones are making most of the world’s people electronically accessible for the first time, and are providing a wealth of data that a stale stack of stamped bill receipts simply cannot compare with. Unless banks and traditional lenders think of themselves primarily as data and technology companies, they will become increasingly irrelevant.
Non-credit bureau-based underwriting is an area that shows great promise in the 
developing world. Indeed, in China, Social Credit Scoring performed by Sesame Credit (part of Alibaba), is due to credit score 900 million people before 2020. In the US and a few other developing countries, fair lending laws limit the use of many pieces of behavioural and demographic data to make credit decisions. I believe the worldwide transition from feature phones to smartphones will mostly be completed within one or two replacement cycles (maximum 5–10 years), and at that point the comprehensive use of mobile phone data to make consumer underwriting decisions will be the norm.
1 See http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-6025.
2 See http://www.foundationcapital.com/admin/resources/whitepapers/p2p-lending-print-h-v20.pdf.25FinTech The Mes3 See http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-07-31/banks-face-hit-on-30-billion-in-
overdraft-fees-from-cfpb-rules.
4 See http://www.bankrate.com/finance/investing/fdic-study-outrageous-overdraft-fees-1.aspx.There are great opportunities ahead, and a new notion of identity can emerge via 
new technologies. The bitcoin blockchain holds enormous potential here. I will not get into the weeds of bitcoin, but given the distributed nature of the blockchain, the emergence of a decentralized credit bureau with global reach is now a real possibility. Using the blockchain ledger to create a global repository of the world’s credit transactions will establish a new way to assess underwriting and risk with data that was previously unavailable. The notion of a thin-file or no-file borrower can become irrelevant – people and companies will have full, instant access to their complete credit history, and make use of it to access loans in any country, regardless of how long these potential borrowers have been there. The notion of data portability across credit bureaus has so far been unheard of. For consumers, the costs to switch financial institutions (monetary and convenience) will reduce drastically. To keep a client, banks will have to compete on service levels as well as on price.
Lowering Costs, Increasing 
Transaction Frequency
Every day most Americans swipe their credit cards for groceries, utility bills, or a night 
out on the town. Charges are applied – merchants pay roughly 30 cents plus 3% of the value of the transaction – and while expensive, merchants oblige because of the convenience credit cards offer to their customers. Given that most retailers have 5–10% net margins, taking credit card payments often wipes out half or more of their profits! Furthermore, imagine that you are a merchant who is also a part of the three billion people (50% of the world’s population) living on less than $2.50 a day. The 30-cent credit card fixed fee just does not add up. Who would pay a third of their income (plus taxes, which often do not get collected on cash transactions) just to swipe a card?
In this case, bitcoin – the internet of money – holds promising potential to bring 
transaction costs down. Anyone can send thousands of bitcoins across the world just as easily as sending one hundredth of a bitcoin, without incurring transaction or remittance fees. Moreover, unlike cash, full information details on the transaction can be attached to it, and be programmed to disburse only after whatever condition has been agreed upon is met— all without any extra cost. Talk about reducing the costs of moving money around!
Most of the costs of holding and moving small balances will be stripped out of such 
a system (eventually including deposit insurance). Electronic delivery and instant disbursement of funds will take place via mobile phone. Daily amortization would be possible for microloans. Pay as you go financial services are on the horizon. As the frequency of transactions increases, across all financial services, the ability for all participants (both customers and lenders) to better react and prevent financial shocks will improve dramatically.
Non-banks, all while still turning a profit and serving more clients, will perform many 
of the banks’ functions better. It is natural that service providers that interact more frequently with clients (mobile phone, retailers, internet providers) perform many of the consumer relationship functions. In many scenarios, banks will need to partner with such lower cost providers in order to remain competitive and relevant to the consumers who are experiencing financial services for the first time. One really wonders what banks will use their branches for 20 years from now!
Change is Coming, Past a Bank 
Near You
The current banking system is not equipped to carry out the challenging task 
of adapting to the new digital landscape. Banks use mostly centralized legacy technology infrastructure, and rely heavily on expensive branches and manual processes. Moreover, given their role in the recent financial crisis, they will keep facing increasing capital and regulatory constraints. Banks will continue to pull away from lending to “risky” clients. Given their high cost base, banks cannot afford to underwrite and lend money in small amounts, as would be convenient for clients.
Under this cost structure, banks rely heavily on fees and tricky penalties to make 
money – no need to hold capital reserves to earn those. Take the overdraft, which generates $30bn+ in fees per year,
3 on automatic overdraft loans of less than 
$30bn+ annually. One FDIC study found that the average consumer would pay an implied APR of 3520% on a $24 ATM overdraft (at the median overdraft fee of $34) – if the overdraft loan were paid back in two weeks.
4 By the way, in 2007, 
total overdraft charges were $17.5bn, so this line item has grown at a “healthy” 9% CAGR since.2626
FinTech The MesMarketplace lending platforms hold the key to making finance as significant and 
well-distributed as it should be. Embracing new data sources and underwriting techniques, as well as using cost-reducing and feature-enabling technologies like bitcoin and the blockchain, is where the next mass-scale opportunities will be unlocked. Lending in the 21st century comes with the promise of transforming the world. The addressable market is immense – five billion people strong. There are plenty of loans yet to be made, and one trillion of them might just be the beginning.
27FinTech The MesThe Next Big Innovation in 
FinTech – Identity
By Benjamin Wakeham 
Founder & CEO, Pollen
Identity is changing. Where historically it was based around family, clan, and 
reputation, it is now governed by the state – incumbents in the truest form. A plastic card is supposed to be a mechanism for who we are, where we come from, and whether this information is legitimate. Something which companies and individuals risk their future and their history on.
Identity is a key piece of global infrastructure which underpins every element of 
our lives. We now reside in a world too advanced for our current identification infrastructure. As we move from a physical world to a digital world, identity has yet to foster any transformative innovation.
However, it is not just identity that is changing. The concept of money is also being 
morphed just as profoundly – 2015 was predicted to be the landmark year when digital transactions overtook cash. With the two trends converging, potentially all we will need for transacting will be our identities. Isn’t the concept of payment just two entities exchanging value anyway? If you look at a £10 note, “I promise to pay the bearer”, it is a trust mechanism, except that with physical cash the trust is put in the government bank.
In America, in the early 1950s, because of a lack of cross-country travel 
infrastructure, transactions took place within villages and towns. Most merchants knew their customers by name, and would therefore keep a credit book for each customer, who would pay off their debts each month, for fear of being banned from the store. However with the growth of train networks and roads, people began to move interstate. Judging a person’s creditworthiness became nigh on impossible.
Then, in 1960, an IBM engineer named Forrest Parry, who was developing a new 
type of ID card for the CIA, had an epiphany: Why not make each card a tiny data storage device in and of itself? He cut a short length of half-inch wide magnetic tape from a reel and wrapped it around a blank plastic card, secured it with Scotch tape, and then, at his wife’s suggestion, pressed it on with a warm iron. The magnetic strip was born. When making a payment, this alongside your signature has been the de facto identity check for over 50 years.
If it Ain’t Broke, Don’t Fix it, Right?
However, payment data hacking was at an all-time high in 2014, with an increase of 21% on the year before. Home Depot believes that a cyberattack earlier that year affected 56 million unique payment cards as part of the largest retail security breach in history.
Javelin Strategy & Research found that $16 billion was stolen from 12.7 million US 
consumers in 2014, or put another way there is a new identity fraud victim every two seconds in 2014.
Identity however, reaches far beyond just payments. The writer of a New York 
Times article detailed how a recent healthcare data breach exposed his child to identity theft that could hinder her for the rest of her life, because her Social Security number was stolen. Since 2005, more than 675 million data records have been involved in data breaches in the US alone, according to the Identity Theft Resource Center. With this level of information, fraudsters can create new bank accounts or take out loans under an actual person’s name. The opportunities for fraudsters are largely due to the sheer number of online accounts that people have these days. Experian found that on average, UK residents will have around 26 accounts, while 25–34-year-olds are more likely to have 40, and around 25% just use the same password for most of their accounts, rather than coming up with a unique password per site.
Some people argue that linking identity and payments leads to the loss of data 
protection and anonymity. My rebuttal consists of the fact that there is a difference between privacy and anonymity. The use of Amazon gift cards in the adult webcam services industry (I found this out through research, not first-hand knowledge) means that users need only share an identifier such as an email address in order to create transactions, therefore protecting their privacy. Those hanging on to the notion of anonymity through cash transactions don’t have much of a choice. Eric Karson, Professor of Marketing and Business Law at the Villanova School of Business, believes that 20 years from now, paper money and coins will be close to extinction, in part because the cost of producing currency will continue to climb, and customer resistance is bound to weaken eventually. “As time passes, more and more consumers 2828
FinTech The Meswill be more comfortable with all things digital. Today’s kids will grow up. There will be 
less and less separation between their digital life and their life in general.”
So let’s all jump aboard and set sail for a new world of digital identity and trust – 
there are certain companies in existence trying to steady this ship:
Social Login
This has been widely adopted by both businesses and consumers, allowing users to verify their identities and log in to websites and mobile applications using existing profiles from networks such as Facebook and LinkedIn. This not only creates a more streamlined experience for consumers, it also enables marketers to capture and leverage rich, first-party social identity data – scary, although users clearly don’t mind – Facebook Login was used more than 10 billion times in 2013 alone.
Twitter Digits
In late 2014, social networking company Twitter introduced Digits, a tool that allows users to sign up for mobile apps and authenticate their identities without the need to create new login credentials. Rather than creating new usernames and passwords, consumers can log in using their cell phone numbers – an identification mechanism they already use every day, eliminating password fatigue for users, and reducing the amount of spam or inactive accounts businesses have to deal with. An individual signs up using his or her phone number, receives an SMS code, enters the code into the verification field, and the process is complete.
Apple Touch ID
Introduced for the Apple 5S, this is a combination of biometric fingerprint, GPS location, and tokenization. Natwest and RBS in the UK are currently using it instead of passwords for account login, and it is a focal point for security for Apple Pay, taking it beyond debit/credit cards in terms of security. One to watch in the next few years.
Trulio
Trulio is the world’s first, social-driven “identity bureau” providing online businesses with an API
1 featuring bank grade levels of security, to instantly verify users 
across the globe. Trulio has created an identity verification product that fuses both traditional and cyber identity data, enabling organizations to verify people online regardless of location, race, creed, colour, situation, circumstance, or environment – anywhere and anytime.
Whilst these applications attempt to create a solution to the password problem, 
I think we need to look deeper and think bigger. Identity management has been identified as one of the most important challenges to overcome – if we know exactly who makes/receives payments globally, the financial systems will be more secure (avoiding fraud, black market economies etc.) and therefore lead to further economic development.
“Identity” is not a simple notion. People can have many different overlapping 
identities which are fundamental to their individuality. Identities can exercise a powerful influence on the health and wellbeing of communities, and the degree to which they can build up social capital.
The chief principle of a well-regulated police state is this: That each person shall be at 
all times and places … recognised as this or the particular person.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1796)
Identity is not about control though, it is about honesty.
The internet is currently something reminiscent of the Wild West. Except instead 
of outlaws, there are hackers and fraudsters. Currently the degree to which these black hat entities operate is mainly in causing digital harm. But our digital and physical worlds are becoming blurred – much like payments, they are one, it is all about connectivity and interaction. With the advent of robotics, the internet of things, and artificial intelligence, it may not be our bank accounts that are hacked, but potentially our airplanes or elderly relative helper robots. I’m very bullish on AI. In the right hands it could do more for humanity than any other innovation to date. However in the wrong hands it could be catastrophic, and whose hands those are relates back to identity.
My vision is for “White Space” on the internet. A concept built on networks, rather than 
index cards in a filing cabinet. Data being shared between entities to create a more holistic view of an individual or entity. It will be reputation rather than regulation that will animate trust in economic exchange. Politician Edmund Bohun in 1696 stated that there was no cash in England with the result that “no trade is managed but by trust”.
1 API stands for application program interface, a set of routines, protocols, and tools for building 
software applications. The API specifies how software components should interact. See the 
chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.29FinTech The MesDue to advances in decentralized ledger technology it is now possible for a record, 
be it a passport or a bank account, to be encrypted and validated amongst all participants in the network. I am talking about the blockchain, the infrastructure on which bitcoin sits. It is currently the biggest decentralized ledger in 2015, and therefore the most failsafe – as with networks, size matters. To all of those involved in blockchain technology, it sounds unscalable, and it is. There will have to be efficiencies created around this – as the network grows, not every record will need to be hashed on every node. The key is in the power of the network making the information stored in such a way that unauthorized alterations are impossible, and therefore the network can be trusted.We can then create a safe harbour where only “validated identities” can interact and transact, where people are permanently connected to the network. But it has to go deeper than just being logged in biometrically to a phone, it has to be a web of connectivity with regular touch points confirming or questioning identity. This web of information would essentially create a self-policing network that does not need to be snooped on or monitored in ways it currently is. It would therefore take us back to something reminiscent of the 17th century, and the importance of reputation. A time where individuals took pride in how they conducted themselves in all aspects of their business, social, and personal life. Something which, I think everyone would agree, could only help civilization at present.3030
FinTech The MesTech Giants Becoming 
Non-Bank Banks
By Eric van der Kleij 
Former Head of Level 39 Technology Accelerator;  Managing Director, ENTIQ
In March 2015, Level39, Europe’s largest accelerator space for financial, 
retail, cyber security, and future city technologies based at Canary Wharf in London, celebrated its second birthday. This gave us a great opportunity to take what we had learned over the previous two years and look forward to the future of FinTech. We made several predictions and the most tantalizing was that social media giant Facebook, should it choose to do so, could become the non-bank bank. Just two weeks later, Facebook announced Facebook Pay. Such is the exciting pace of change affecting the industry. It is also the biggest opportunity.
To some, Facebook becoming a major financial service player capable of rivalling 
the current giants might be an outlandish assertion. But if we explore some of the reasoning behind it, some compelling and wholly disruptive possibilities for the FinTech sector as a whole start to emerge.
The big question facing established financial services organizations, from banks to 
insurers and beyond, is whether they can regain the trust of the consumer in order to safeguard their retail and private banking, and consumer-facing businesses. The financial crisis has had many victims, and banking and insurance brands are among them. The additional uncertainty to all of this is whether consumers can trust governments, and this is currently being played out in places like Greece – with even more uncertainty to come. Distrust in anything that can be lumped together by the consumer as traditional financial services is running at uncomfortable levels, if not becoming endemic. But the more fascinating question I would ask is not whether banks can regain trust, but rather, perhaps, whether they should even try. Instead, should we be rethinking financial services models to allow a new wave of consumer-facing brands to emerge, with traditional banks becoming the banks of service behind these new brands?
The erosion of trust in retail banking is of course partly a function of banks’ 
departure from their original purpose of keeping our money safe, in return for a promissory note. The promise to pay the bearer on demand remains on the banknotes, but it is the stuff of history. Arguably, the departure from this early promise is a contributory factor in customer disappointment at what their bank’s brand has ultimately come to represent.
You can see interesting signs of this in fluctuations in the value of bitcoin 
(effectively a non-sovereign currency, with only the confidence of its users underpinning its value), which tends to rise when there is negative sentiment or distrust of traditional banking and finance. If, for example, Greeks find they cannot withdraw cash from a bank, but that they can receive payment for their produce in bitcoin, and if they can buy a growing number of things with those bitcoins (instantly and without bank charges), then who could blame them for switching over?
But consider this: if traditional financial services providers reposition themselves 
as “infrastructure” or banks of service, or insurers of service behind new, trusted, non-financial brands, they may no longer need to fight to remain costly retail brands. This would create an opportunity for brands with better consumer trust to emerge as potentially very strong financial services players, as markets open up to competition from entirely new platforms. These online challengers would enjoy the privilege of building highly efficient platforms from scratch without the financial or reputational overhead of supporting a legacy. As such, they may find it easier to meet the new regulatory requirements demanded from the industry. They will certainly be well placed to achieve a single customer view which is something that has eluded legacy banks for years.
But is this really going to happen? The early signs suggest yes and the pace of 
change is fast. In just one year we have seen Facebook launch free friend-to-friend payments, Atom launched its app-based challenger bank, Alibaba, China’s largest e-commerce platform, opened the online Mybank, and Amazon offered loans to SMEs which sell through its platform. The potential for Facebook in this context is phenomenal. More than any other social media platform, Facebook is the custodian of the narrative of our lives. While the ongoing debate on privacy rages and commentators grapple with policy imperatives, one fact remains: Facebook knows things about us that no other company does. Ergo, they are in an unrivalled position to offer financial services products to us because they can evaluate demand, risk, and potentially character, in a richer and deeper way than has ever been possible previously. Unlike the traditional credit rating houses, Facebook’s trove of personal 31FinTech The Mesinsight adds more layers to risk assessment than conventional trawls though 
legacy data, transactional histories, and the electoral roll. Therefore, it moves the process from a largely 
 one-dimensional, numerical footing onto an altogether more 
behavioural and thematic dimension.
A key contributor to the financial crisis was the poor origination and underwriting 
process of mortgage companies. If those lenders had an additional signal, such as a simple traffic light system based on a life-narrative-based profile and only lent to the “greens” and “ambers”, do you think that their mortgage-backed securities would have been more secure? My hunch is absolutely yes, especially if the ultimate, true value and risk of those “packaged” securities were made instantly transparent through FinTech innovation such as the truth embodied in an indelible blockchain.
The full extent of Facebook’s ambitions in financial services is only just starting to 
become apparent, but what is obvious is the phenomenal disruptive advantage Facebook would have if it chose to enter the sector fully. If handled well, and with reassuring transparency, a serious move into financial services could utterly delight their community.
If, for the sake of argument, we consider Facebook to be a somewhat more 
trusted brand than many banks are right now, the fact that they can compete very aggressively by offering free payment services is a good thing for the consumer. It reduces consumer cost and provides better choice. For the under-banked on tight household budgets, a few pounds’ saving on bill payments over a year can be significant.
But this model throws up the need for a whole new relationship of trust. The 
consumer must be satisfied that they trust their new “non-bank bank” with their data. So there needs to be a new promise. Where previously the bank promised to pay the bearer in silver, the new promise might be a guarantee not to share your data, in effect to be the bank of your data and keep it safe. Or do they actually go a step further? The new promise to the bearer could in fact be: “If you trust me to keep your data safe, I will optimize its value by helping you to monetize it.” Plus, of course, free financial services as a given.
There is a potentially huge volume of continuous data to be drawn from consenting 
customers’ financial narratives. The world’s best data monetizers like Facebook, Google, and Twitter could quite naturally promise to pay you, the bearer, in some form of financial credit. In essence, the non-bank bank could pay you “interest” on your data deposits. This is an entirely new form of promise that the industry might propagate.
But things are never that simple and it is not all rosy for new entrants to the well-
established financial services sector. Because they are new to the market, there is the risk of significantly under-estimating the technical scale and regulatory requirements for delivering the services we are currently used to from the established banks. While the new entrants may be enjoying their honeymoon period, this could easily be soured if the sophisticated digital consumer encounters second-rate user interfaces or latency in transactions.
Worse still, any failure to protect customer data in the way that financial services 
customers have come to expect could be devastating. And of course, the new players also present a wider canvas of vulnerability for hackers. The more systems there are with more data to hack, the greater the vulnerability. New entrants to the market will need to play serious catch-up to understand, replicate, or indeed improve the established proprietary systems for protecting customers.
But one thing is certain – technology will succeed. Technologists will learn quickly 
what they need to do to provide competitive, secure services to the required quality, standard, and regulatory rigour. And when they do, the full potential of the non-bank banks will become clearer.
What, for example, if a single (or a collaboration of) new financial services brands 
create sufficient volume of transactions to allow “netting”? It is a concept from the telecommunications sector, where operators allowed each other to originate and terminate calls on their respective infrastructure and net the charges at the end of each month. If applied to new retail banking platforms, digital netting would allow a huge volume of transactions to side-step the need for the transfer of value through established networks. The regulators and tax authorities would need to be happy, but if they were, then netting could save substantial transmission costs with a commensurate impact on margins. Of course, netting would only be feasible for new brands with sufficient scale. Clearly, the opportunity for a Facebook or an Alibaba in this context is significant.
Sceptics might ask one simple but pertinent question; can a new brand with 
absolutely no experience in financial services succeed as a bank, insurer, or 3232
FinTech The Mesother provider of service to the financial consumer? From a purely branding 
perspective, there are some affirmative precedents. As a brand, Virgin was a record label before it was a bank (albeit a bank which now offers Sex Pistols credit cards). And Russian Standard Bank, with its 28 million customers and 53,000 points of sale in 1,800 cities, was a leading brand of vodka when its entrepreneurial owners made the move into banking. Today, the vodka and the bank co-exist quite successfully under a single brand identity and consumer loyalty. So, from a brand perspective, the rise of the non-bank bank is entirely possible. Especially so with the phenomenal work being done by entrepreneurs to improve access control, to develop unimpeachable authentication and, with support from the regulator and Treasury, to encourage banks to safely open up their platforms through APIs.
1
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.33FinTech The MesDesign is No Longer an 
Option – User Experience  (UX) in FinTech
By Terry Cordeiro
FinTech Thought Leader
and Ivo Weevers
Co-Founder, Albert – Mobile Invoicing App
Design was previously an afterthought in the financial services sector. However 
this has changed completely as financial services compete with the most famous consumer brands for customers. Good design is strategically important and also provides guidelines for good user experience (UX) in FinTech.
If a stranger on the street asked you for your bank details, would you give them to him? 
And if he said he would use them to help you with financial planning would you share them? And finally, if you found out he worked for a trusted organization, authorized by the Financial Conduct Authority, would that persuade you to divulge your financial details?
These types of conversations are not uncommon in the world of FinTech. In both 
the real and digital worlds, the customer decides based on his first impression and typically relies on trust and the perceived integrity of the relationship. Designing UX for FinTech is all about these interactions and building trusted relationships between the end user and the product.
UX DESIGN = Big Bucks
The design change of a button increased a large online retailer’s annual revenue by $300 million.
1 Expedia increased profits by $12M by changing the design of their 
registration process.2 And a recent report from venture capital firm Kleiner Perkin 
in San Francisco demonstrates the important role design plays in the success of new start-ups and technologies.3 Today, new solutions are less about the actual 
technology and more about the experience and value they create for the user. Many FinTech companies have not yet fully embraced UX which can be a risk for product success. This chapter gives a brief introduction to UX in FinTech alongside guidelines from our own experiences which will hopefully push the thinking around the topic forward.
A Definition for UX
Let’s start with a formal definition. “User experience encompasses all aspects of the end-user’s interaction with the company, its services, and its products.”
4 Its goal is 
to enhance user satisfaction by improving the usability, accessibility, and pleasure provided by the interaction between the user and the product (often digital). UX design includes interaction design, visual design, motion design, user research and more. It is a critical ingredient in a successful product development approach.
UX and FinTech
Over 15 million banking apps have been downloaded in the UK and almost 80% of bank customers use online or mobile banking at least once a month. Financial services are embracing the digital revolution. Financial organizations are starting to understand the crucial role of UX in the overall customer experience and brand loyalty. More and more have established internal design teams by hiring talent and acquiring UX agencies or UX-led tech companies. Capital One bank for instance has acquired top UX design agency Adaptive Path and UX-led personal finance app Level Money to quickly create an exceptional pool of internal design talents.
The nature of financial services however imposes specific challenges to designing 
great experiences. Its highly regulated environment needs security and data protection, strong identification, and authentication procedures and depends on existing, old-fashioned, but critical infrastructures. These conditions often threaten optimal interactions.
1 The $300 million button: http://www.uie.com/articles/three_hund_million_button.
2 Expedia deletes one field from their registration process, increases profit $12m http://www
.conversionvoodoo.com/blog/2011/11/expedia-deletes-one-field-from-their-registration-process-
increases-profit-12m/.3 Design In Tech Report, John Maeda, Design partner, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers. http://
www.kpcb.com/blog/design-in-tech-report-2015.
4 User Experience: http://www.nngroup.com/articles/definition-user-experience/. 3434
FinTech The MesAn Example: Password Fatigue
In order to protect our data and money, services check that we are who we say 
we are. This authentication often relies heavily on usernames and passwords. The problem is that secure passwords are both hard to create and hard to remember. On top of that we have multiple passwords and usernames.
To give an indication the average person:•	Logs into different 10 sites/ mobile apps per day
•	Holds passwords to 30–40 sites.
To cope with this cognitive burden people make passwords easy to remember, 
like the first girlfriend’s name with her year of birth (laura1980). Easy to remember? Yes. Secure? No. The most secure would be to create a unique password for each site consisting of a long random combination of alphanumerics and symbols (KJ76RTnns!). Secure? Yes. Easy to remember? No. Poor UX? Definitely.
Mobile banking login screens have chosen different authentication mechanisms, 
resulting in different product engagement. With the first one, the user needs to count in his head the required characters, which is a huge cognitive burden. The second one uses iPhone’s fingerprint recognition, which consumes much less cognitive power. Recent mechanisms are exploring emotional alternatives, such as using emojis to find secure and much easier ways of interacting. Design choices on registration processes and buttons have a huge impact on adoption and revenue. They should not be taken lightly.
Seven Guidelines
The last few years have seen dramatic changes in how people engage with brands. New smart devices, with varying interaction mechanisms and with the power of desktop computers, are revolutionizing the immediate needs of people. And this is happening in a world that is moving faster every day.
With these shifting paradigms, and the need for building trusted interactions 
between users and products, FinTech organizations need to put UX design central in their organization. This is not a matter of spraying some colour on the products. Design decisions made at the various stages of the development process will have significant impact on product success.
Based on our own years of experience in large and small FinTech organizations, we 
have defined seven guidelines that have proven to be helpful in designing financial experiences.
1. Invest in design from the start and from the top
The twentieth-century marketing perspective of “making people want things” 
has transitioned to a twenty-first-century approach of “making things people want”.
5 Design – with its focus on users – is the route through which brands will 
either succeed or fail. Imagine the creation of a new mobile payment product. Its success depends on whether customers get a positive first impression, trust it, sign up for it, understand it, and come back next time to make another payment.UX design influences all these steps and therefore should be top-of-mind from the start. It needs to integrate closely with most business decisions. To achieve this, any organization needs to:
a.
 Dedicate money and time to design from the start;
b. Build an empowered, talented, and preferably internal design team;
c. Define clear business design objectives.
The fourth employee of Square, the US-based payments company, was a 
creative director. Many new successful tech companies such as AirBnB and Pinterest have designers as founders.
2. Understand all steps in the end-to-end experience
When we conducted a mobile payment pilot for a large UK bank, we found that its potential relied mostly on the compatibility of third-party point-of-sale systems. Users understood how to use the payments app, they would initiate the payment, and they even remembered to pull out their mobile phone to do so. However, as point-of-sale systems communicate differently (even within the same shops), they caused payment failures and as a consequence users lost trust.
Financial services often, more than many other industries, depend on third-party 
systems to complete the end-to-end experience. These can include purchase systems, security and credit checks, bank connections, and many more. Strategic choices on which systems to partner with will have a huge impact on the adoption 
5 The secrets of the Chief Design Officer http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/secrets-
chief-design-officer-0.35FinTech The Mesof the product. For example, the data required, the support needed, or the way 
these systems integrate in mobile experiences, are all important influencers for the user’s experience. Any strategic choice on infrastructure and technology should be considered and tested in light of the expected end-user experience.
3. Marry design and engineering
Great UX is not just about what is happening on the screen. Close collaboration with engineering is an underestimated but crucial factor. Code and its performance directly impact the user’s perception of the product’s quality. This perception is formed by things such as start-up time, page-loading behaviour, smoothness of transitions and animations, errors, and waiting times.Instagram is a great example of how to achieve a lightning-fast mobile experience by close collaboration between engineering and design.
6 Some 
examples:
a. Their software starts uploading the picture after the user has taken it, but 
before he has confirmed the details, providing the customer with a sense of speed and contributing to their ease-of-use.
b.
 The local fast processing of photo filters to the image became the killer fea-ture, setting the app apart from all others.
The best digital experiences are created by a happy marriage between design and engineering. We have seen many initiatives first hand struggling with this because of outsourcing one or the other, or misunderstanding and miscommunication between the two. Choices about how to organize design and engineering are crucial to make the marriage work.
4. Use design to speed up decision-making
Design techniques such as rapid prototyping maximize fast learning. They are used by Google Ventures’s Design Sprint
7 and the Build-Measure-Learn8 method. 
Design makes ideas tangible, which allows them to be tested quickly with potential end-users, and importantly for FinTech, they can be quickly evaluated in light of other finance factors, such as risk and compliance. It shortcuts the usual endless-debate cycles and compresses months into a week.An example: At a previous start-up we had to build the sign-up flow for a payment service. The team had endless debates about whether the user should use a numeric pin code, a character-based password, or a Facebook login. A simple prototype built in half a day revealed that (by that time) Facebook login was not trusted with financial services, and a password slowed down the user much more than a pin code. A decision was made. Rapid prototyping techniques help to understand problems by all disciplines and make decisions much quicker.
5. Save costly development time
The designers and engineers at the London-based mobile FinTech start-up Albert iterated several times on the design of sign-up flow for our mobile app. They designed screens, put them together in a prototype, and tested these with several people. And then, they incorporated the feedback, updated the designs, and started again. Until the ultimate user experience was found.
What started as a flow of 11 screens was simplified to six screens. Most screens 
followed a similar layout. This not only resulted in a much simpler experience (a 100% sign-up success was achieved in beta test) but also in a much quicker development cycle:
a.
 The development team needed to implement and fewer screens and error cases.
b. The screens followed similar screen layouts, which allowed for code re-use.
Hours of design iterations saved weeks of development work. Instilling design 
practices from the start will save a lot of development work.
6. Aim at Uber-like simplicity with a high trust level
Mobile finance apps reside on the same phone as Uber and Instagram-like apps. Users compare finance apps with these consumer apps (rather than with other financial services). On top of that, the financial app needs to build extra trust. Losing a photograph is annoying, but leaking finance data is disastrous. FinTech experiences should have the simplicity of other consumer experiences but with the extra care devoted to security and building trust. There are many ways to do that. These are some examples that proved to be very helpful:
•	Explain security measures: Personal finance tool Mint was one of the first to 
start by explaining clearly and upfront to users the encryption mechanisms it had put in place to guarantee data security.
•	People forget passwords: This happens. Ensure the journey to reset their password is an integrated and simple part of the overall experience; this should never be an afterthought.
6 The 3 White Lies Behind Instagram’s Lightning Speed http://www.fastcodesign.com/1669788/
the-3-white-lies-behind-instagrams-lightning-speed.
7 Google Venture’s Design Sprint http://www.gv.com/sprint/.
8 Build-Measure-Learn method in “The Lean Startup” http://theleanstartup.com/.3636
FinTech The Mes•	Let users control when sensitive data is displayed: A great new mobile 
payment feature we developed generated an access code for the user to enter into an ATM. Rapid user testing showed that people were worried that others could read the code on the mobile screen. We ensured the code was masked initially, letting the user decide when he felt comfortable to reveal it.
•	MAYA (Most Advanced, Yet Acceptable): New technologies often introduce new ways of interacting with data. This can be cool and unique but also unsettling. The more closely a design resonates with what a user knows, the easier it is to build trust. FinTech solutions should keep the current users’ expectations of interacting with technologies in mind when designing new experiences.
7. Attractive things reduce errors
Good aesthetics will not only have a higher appeal, but also a functional and cost benefit. Japanese and Israeli researchers
9 developed two forms of automated teller 
machines, the ATM machines that allow us to get money and do simple banking tasks. Both forms were identical in function, the number of buttons, and how they worked, but one had the buttons and screens arranged attractively, the other unattractively. The researchers found that the attractive ones were easier to use.And easier-to-use ATMs meant:
a.
 Fewer errors
b. Faster throughput
c. Fewer customer service requests
d. Fewer card blockages
e. And ultimately, happier customers.
Despite ATMs not being the latest advance in FinTech, this demonstrates 
the impact well-designed interfaces have on financial products and their customers.
Conclusion
We’ve gone over seven guidelines that address UX in relation to FinTech. Design choices on different levels affect user adoption, trust, customer satisfaction, and ultimately revenue. We have successfully adopted these guidelines to create trusted relationships between the user and the product, and hope they spark conversation to advance the role of UX in FinTech.
9 Donald Norman (2005) Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things.37FinTech The MesFinTech Hubs3This part provides an overview of current and aspiring 
FinTech “hubs” – the places where FinTech ecosystems are catalysed and growing. It gives real-world examples of the essential prerequisites for the establishment of FinTech centres around the world. It is a success story and checklist of what FinTech players have done right for their city (or country) to thrive in a globally competitive FinTech environment.
We will explore established FinTech centres like London, 
discuss France’s FinTech-favourable conditions, and examine the Netherlands as an integrated FinTech ecosystem. In addition, we review buzzing FinTech scenes, ranging from Luxembourg, to Austria, India, and Singapore, each having its own unique characteristics that set it apart as a potential frontrunner in FinTech.42
FinTech hubs42Nurturing New FinTech 
Communities
By Claire Cockerton 
CEO & Chairwoman, ENTIQ
Entrepreneurs, computer scientists, coders, investors, governments, and 
consumers are turning to FinTech innovations to drive forward the reinvention of banking, finance, and commerce. Financial services technology has been around for decades of course, but we are now seeing the emergence of entirely new business models, technical innovation, and customer experiences that are, thankfully, constructively and creatively disrupting the status quo.
In the UK, we have called it a great movement of tech-driven transformation. Similarly 
to what happened in the music, travel, and media industries, FinTech is bringing the digital revolution to finance, and in the process, creating high-growth SMEs, jobs, and broader economic development. FinTech clusters and start-up density can help accelerate this transformation and growth in the finance sector, as well as helping overcome common challenges. Identifying the ingredients and the best ways to stimulate these FinTech clusters will be vital for the industry going forward, and I consider it one of the most important agendas a government can pursue.
The global FinTech sector is growing at an incredible rate, enjoying 200% year-
on-year growth in funding and, according to data from CB Insights, attracting $12.2 billion in growth capital in 2014. In 2014, in the UK alone the FinTech sector generated more than £20 billion in revenue. Clusters are emerging all over the world and offering innovators (big banks and start-ups alike) access to engaged communities of serial entrepreneurs, investors, academics, technologists, and industry experts, all of whom, combined, can provide accelerated learning, product iteration, and opportunities to collaborate and grow.
Regulation, its constraints and forthcoming changes, as well as the ongoing 
complexities and requirements in protecting the general consumer from another crisis, requires a new kind of engagement between stakeholders.
Large incumbents provide historical insight, a powerful resource pool (from 
human capital to venture funds), global market access, and infrastructure and are perfect clients in need of this community of FinTech innovators. Investors, from FinTech angels to specialist venture capitalists (VCs), are taking the calculated risk around the world, with particular interests and knowledge in payments, cloud computing, blockchain, enterprise software, cyber security, and data analytics – major challenges, major opportunities. Regulators are forging innovation hubs to increase accessibility to start-ups, clarity around the authorization process, and to help inform reform. Universities are revising curricula to focus on digital languages and applied learning, and they are creating channels to these FinTech hubs for students to do their part directly after graduation. After-school and “hobby” coders are enlisting in financial services hackathons, showcasing that talent does not necessarily come from the ivory tower or corporate metropolis. Policy-makers are opening their doors to these FinTech communities, inviting feedback from innovators and being present at tech demos and roundtables in accelerators. Real estate developers, like Canary Wharf Group, also play an important role in providing the office space, which leverages the proximity of these powerful industry actors and creates a growth proposition for these rapidly scaling companies. Despite the diverse and dynamic agendas and the big challenges of doing so, the strongest FinTech clusters are managing to facilitate conversations between these stakeholders, driven by the potential outcome for the industry.
London and New York are already well established as global FinTech hubs, but what 
can emerging FinTech start-up communities, like those in Sydney, Leeds, Singapore, Dublin, Tel Aviv, and Seoul, learn from the success of existing FinTech hubs?
Moving beyond Michael Porter’s top-down approach to business clusters, and with 
a hat tip to Brad Feld’s seminal book Start-up Communities, let us explore a couple of case studies from successful FinTech hubs and consider how new FinTech hubs can be created. How might another cluster emerge with its own unique composition of entrepreneurs, technologists, industry experts, and incumbents and how can these communities come together, to form constructive interactions and a cohesive narrative to thrive and grow on the global stage?
Lessons from a Leader
London was named as Europe’s most successful FinTech hub in 2015, and serves as a prime example for future development in the sector. So what sets London apart from the competition?FinTech hubs43London has been at the heart of global trade for centuries and has a well-
established financial services industry to match. As you would expect, there are large established banks with new venture funds, FinTech-focused angels, and VCs, as well as alternative finance options, like crowdfunding and peer-to-peer lending, which are all-important in providing early-stage working capital for FinTech start-ups. Low corporate tax rates, labour laws, entrepreneur’s relief, enterprise investment schemes, research and development tax recovery (like patent box), and the ease with which businesses can be set up, are all significant governmental measures which make the UK a favourable place for entrepreneurs and innovators. Close proximity to investors through a host of pitching and matchmaking events, government-initiated roundtable events, and in-depth consultations with SMEs as part of regulatory reform, are all fostering deep engagement with the sector. These features all make London a place where you have a seat at the table, regardless of background or size of business.
Proximity and the creation of convening points provide an important focus for 
the FinTech community. Stakeholders can minimize travel to meet with many companies and they can maximize exposure to the ecosystem. A flying visit to Silicon Valley, for example, is worth it for investors because they know they can visit dozens of companies in a couple of days, with hundreds of tech firms located within just 30 miles of each other. This proximity creates a natural knowledge-share and network effect, where one meeting leads to another complementary introduction, which can lead to a merger, joint venture, or partnership. This cluster also breeds competition, as one company spurs another one to refine the industry’s products and services.
The multidisciplinary and multinational talent, which exists in the City, is another 
reason behind London’s success. There is a deep pool of talent available, not only provided by experienced bankers who are looking to move into the “emergent” FinTech cluster, but also a thriving culture of technology innovation delivered by code clubs and basement developers. This is coupled with some of the world’s leading educational institutions, like University College London and Imperial College, which serve as hotbeds of academic and specialist technological study. The Open Data institute and computer science programmes are linked with internships and apprenticeships within the start-up community. Businesses are desperate for talent and talent is a powerful catalyst for growth and innovation. It is our responsibility as an industry to identify and nurture these talents and bring them into FinTech – show them the career development opportunities, the skills which can be developed on the ground at a growing business. And we are not just speaking about tech or finance talent – the FinTech industry needs designers, communicators, marketers, human factors experts, and commercialization skills. Multiculturalism and diversity are also key to long-term and scalable success. Newcomers to London bring with them an understanding of foreign markets and diversity brings a healthier business and better products for all consumers. London has this in its roots, and must continue to cultivate it as it is so central to our competitive edge.
London is also a beneficiary of negative circumstance. If necessity is the mother 
of invention, London surely had a burning platform for change. The 2008 financial crisis caused a huge contraction of large incumbents, instigated rapid regulatory change, shifted public sentiment towards banking, and promoted a surge in entrepreneurship. The credit crisis gave rise to alternative forms of lending, consumers had a new desire to change service providers, and many ex-corporate employees looked to use their market insights to create new products and services for the banks now under new pressures to reform. The banking industry underwent restructuring, and it is this change, preceded by crisis, which laid the foundation for a more diverse and dynamic market to emerge.
To embrace and accelerate this change, the UK has also seen the rise of a new 
industry body for FinTech called Innovate Finance, a cross-sector, member-driven organization that aims to anchor and develop the UK’s leading position in global financial services by serving as a single access point to the full financial services and technology ecosystem. Innovate Finance’s role was designed to be a neutral voice for this FinTech revolution. The member organization serves large and small companies, works with the Treasury and aims to drive forward the agenda of competition, diversity, and consumer choice. It plays a key role in delivering a convening voice for all parties in a non-biased way, and creates channels to the stakeholder map discussed above.
These factors have all combined to create what is Europe’s most successful FinTech 
hub to date, therefore learning the lessons of London will be vital in developing similar clusters across the globe. If firms can access talent, technology, and capital in a close-knit physical environment conducive to communication, innovation, and trade, they have an excellent chance of success. Let us pick up on these two threads of location and company culture to investigate the impact on developing FinTech clusters around the world today.44
FinTech hubs44Location, Location, Location
Turning to other emerging clusters, we are seeing Sydney’s FinTech community 
gather around tech hubs like Tyro and Stone & Chalk, which aim to encourage creativity and innovation in the sector. Tim Williams, chief executive of the Committee of Sydney, stated that this was “an absolute necessity if Sydney wants to stay ahead of the financial services game”, going on to describe it as “a once-in-a-decade opportunity, to bring the ICT, banking, and start-up sectors together”.
Like London, Sydney already has a respected and robust financial services sector. 
It is currently estimated that, as of June 2015, there are more than 100 companies which can be classified as FinTech start-ups based in the city, including players in data, payments, wealth, and capital markets, with Sydney’s banks being among the most profitable in the world.
Likewise, Leeds, another emerging FinTech hub in the UK, has an extraordinary wealth 
of back office and operational functional outposts for big banks, so it continues to attract interest and investment in these areas. Identifying a city’s strengths is therefore key to creating a lasting, high-quality, specialized ecosystem which is recognized globally.
The location of a FinTech hub cannot be underestimated. Historical and local 
assets must be engaged and leveraged to build a hub with its own specialisms. For these hubs to be successful, a wide range of industries and organizations need to participate – designers, writers, commercial teams – and we need to connect these hubs to universities, laboratories, trade bodies, data centres, professional service providers, and expert mentor communities.Swedish FinTech hubs cite the Nordic “Law of Jante” – the idea of placing emphasis on collective benefit, rather than individual success. This means creating a collaborative, open culture, one which embraces potential and newness, rather than familiarity and hierarchy.
Actively encouraging employees to generate new concepts is not only great 
for boosting morale and keeping everyone on an even footing, but can act as a powerful catalyst – awakening the latent talent and expertise within an existing team. Some of the best ideas come from the “shop-floor”, from the front lines of business delivery; so a corporate’s innovation strategy should also start with its own assets – its employees.
In addition to the spirit of collaboration and partnership, competition is also a very 
healthy force in accelerating the growth of FinTech communities globally. This is a critical mandate for regulators, governments, and the academic community. Competition forces the incumbents to consistently re-examine their proposition to customers, not getting too comfortable, and investing in a process of continuous improvement.
It is with these dynamics in mind that we have mapped out the ingredients of 
thriving FinTech hubs. We can see that nurturing specialist FinTech communities has the potential to deliver a much bigger transformation in tech. It is not just about the start-ups, innovators, and entrepreneurs, but about bringing their vision, agility, and power together with the other necessary stakeholders to deliver lasting change.La (French) FinTech 
Connection
By Alain Clot
CEO, Dexia Credit Local; President, France FinTech
and Jean‐Michel Pailhon
FinTech Thought Leader
Over recent years, FinTech has begun to attract media visibility, partly given 
the massive amounts of new funding raised by some of its most pre‐eminent representatives, either through IPO (Lending Club, Yodlee, On Deck), or through late‐stage funding rounds of $100m and above (Stripe, Funding Circle, Transferwise, SoFi, Klarna, Square, Adyen, to name just a few). Among all these new “digital champions of financial services” that have successfully raised hundreds of millions of dollars – sometimes called “FinTech unicorns” – the majority are US and UK companies, some are Scandinavian, one Dutch, but so far there is not a single French one.
Are French entrepreneurs bad at creating successful FinTech companies? Renaud 
Laplanche
1 (CEO/founder of Lending Club), Stephane Dubois2 (CEO/founder of 
Xignite), Philippe Gelis3 (CEO and co‐founder of Kantox), and even David Marcus4 
(Head of Messaging Products at Facebook, which entered the mobile payments battle in March 2015 with Facebook Messenger’s new money transfer feature) were all born in France. Unfortunately (from a purely French perspective), they have all migrated elsewhere to launch or scale their successful venture (either to the US or the UK). Would their ventures have been less successful if they had decided to stay in, or return to, France to launch their FinTech projects back in the mid/late‐2000s? Maybe … probably … certainly.
What happened in the past is in the past. Today’s question should be: will the newly 
emerging French‐born FinTech entrepreneurs have to migrate out of France to succeed in the FinTech space during the second half of the 2010s?France’s International Centre 
of Excellence in Science and Technology
First of all France is widely known for the quality of its academic programmes in 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. France is the world’s fourth Nobel Prize‐winning country in the sciences (with awards for chemistry, physics, physiology, and medicine, plus the Nobel Memorial Prize in economics), with 36 laureates.
5 French research laboratories in applied mathematics, statistics, and 
economic sciences are widely recognized as among the best in the world: the Institute of Advanced Scientific Studies (IHES), the Ecole Normale Supérieure (ENS, Paris), the Toulouse School of Economics (TSE) and the Paris School of Economics (PSE), among others. Some French researchers have recently earned the highest international distinctions in mathematics (Fields Medal for Cédric Villani in 2010) and economic sciences (Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences for Jean Tirole in 2014). Not to mention the most highly sought‐after engineers in cryptology and coding, graduating from French Computer Science schools such as the National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation (INRIA) or the Ecole Polytechnique (X).
At a more down‐to‐earth level (e.g., business‐wise), several bankers, private 
equity investors, hedge fund managers, and quants currently working for the most powerful and prestigious financial services companies (e.g., banks, hedge funds, and private equity firms) in London, New York, Hong Kong, or Singapore graduated from top French business and engineering schools.
It is generally expected that FinTech start‐ups that will succeed will do so thanks 
to their ability to innovate and leverage their own technology and business model. In that context, being able to source and attract highly qualified human capital is a key factor of success for a newly incorporated FinTech start‐up. And being close to some of the most developed talent management clusters in computer science, economics, and cryptology is definitely a positively skewed key differentiator. It is no coincidence that Paris was ranked the World’s Best Capital of Intellectual Capital and Innovation by PwC in May 2014
6 and that Facebook launched its first Artificial 1 https://www.lendingclub.com/public/renaud‐laplanche.action.
2 http://www.xignite.com/market‐data/about/people/stephane‐dubois/.
3 http://www.fintechprofile.com/2015/04/15/philippe‐gelis‐kantox/.
4 http://www.bloomberg.com/research/stocks/people/person.asp?personId=23246193&ticker=E
BAY&previousCapId=27862&previousTitle=EBAY%2520INC.5 http://people.idsia.ch/~juergen/all.html.
6 Source: “PwC Cities of Opportunity 6”, http://www.pwccn.com/home/eng/cities_of_
opportunity_6.html.45FinTech hubsIntelligence (AI) Lab in Paris (first one outside of the US after those in Menlo Park 
and New York).7
France’s Entrepreneurial, 
Investment, and Tax Environments
Secondly, France has become a (much more) favourable country for entrepreneurs 
and investors over the last couple of years. The French government has launched several public initiatives to support entrepreneurship, providing start‐ups with highly competitive funding capacities for R&D activities through public grants, subsidies, and research tax credit (“CIR”), enhanced and facilitated equity and debt financing for tech and innovative companies through the French public investment bank (“BPI”), specific tax regime on capital gains for retail investors (“PEA” and “PEA/PME”), a 50% discount on investment in SMEs for high net worth individuals (“ISF”), and five years’ amortization of corporate venture investments in SMEs, among (many) other initiatives.
KPMG’s Competitive Alternatives report (2014) compared effective corporate tax 
rates in 10 different countries and ranked France first for R&D services and third for digital services, two highly FinTech‐related topics.
8
Since the beginning of the 2010s, the French capital, Paris, has shown buoyant entrepreneurial activity, with over 40 business incubators being created, hundreds of co‐working spaces, several fab labs, between 1,000 and 1,500 start‐ups being set up annually, and a growing number of Tech success stories (Criteo, BlaBlaCar, Deezer, SigFox, to name just a few).
France also aims to attract international entrepreneurial talent. In achieving that 
goal, France benefits from an inherent advantage: its quality of life is praised internationally, making it the best place in the world to live according to several international studies. France performs well in many measures of wellbeing relative to most other countries in the OECD’s Better Life Index: France ranks above average in environmental quality, housing, work‐life balance, and health status.
9 In addition, the French government has created a dedicated programme 
designed for non‐French entrepreneurs from all over the world who want to establish their start‐up in Paris: The French Tech Ticket.
10 Through this competitive 
programme, the founding team will be helped to set up in France, with a dedicated contact to help them deal with administrative procedures. Prize money of up €25,000 will be awarded to each founder selected, and the start‐up will also get free office space in the heart of Paris at one of the leading local incubators.
France’s Regulatory Environment 
for Innovative Financial Services
France has also been rather quick to adapt to the “new deal of FinTech” from a regulatory 
and legislative standpoint. Indeed, France created a specific regulatory regime for crowdfunding activities in October 2014 (with the creation of a specific Crowdfunding Investment Adviser status: the “CIP” in French), and has responded positively to innovation in financial services with lighter regulation for non‐banking activities.
11
And if France is not (yet?) in the same situation as the UK, where the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) launched an initiative dedicated to advise and assist FinTech start‐ups with their regulatory duties in October 2014,
12 the latter initiative provides 
a very interesting model which may potentially be replicated in France to further enhance growth in the financial services sector, whilst maintaining an appropriate level of understanding and regulatory monitoring on the French FinTech sector.
France’s Strategic Business 
and Geographic Positioning
France has a strong and highly diversified economy. Located at the heart of 
Europe, the world’s largest market, it is also an ideal springboard for markets in other European countries, as well as Africa and the Middle East. From a business 
7 http://newsroom.fb.comf/news/2015/06/introducing‐facebook‐ai‐research‐paris/.
8 http://www.gouvernement.fr/en/attractiveness‐productivity‐taxes‐10‐cliches‐about‐france‐
proved‐wrong‐once‐and‐for‐all.9 http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/countries/france/.
10 http://www.frenchtechticket.paris/.
11 http://www.amf‐france.org/en_US/Acteurs‐et‐produits/Prestataires‐financiers/Financement‐
participatif—crowdfunding/Cadre‐reglementaire.html?langSwitch=true.
12 http://www.fca.org.uk/news/innovation‐the‐regulatory‐opportunity.4646
FinTech hubsstandpoint, France is a country of 67 million consumers, showing a potentially 
massive demand for innovative financial services in banking, insurance, investment/asset management, financing, and payment, whether supplied by domestic or international ventures.
France’s FinTech Start‐ups 
Association
On the basis of all these positive factors, and being keen to show the world that 
FinTech is thriving in France, 45 (as of end June 2015, and still growing) French FinTech entrepreneurs joined forces to create a lobbying body called “France FinTech”.
13
This newly created association (launched in 2015) is designed to welcome all start‐ups using innovative business and technological models that aim to address currently existing or emerging issues in the financial services industry. France FinTech plans to share experience, knowledge, and information with its members, to commission and coordinate market research studies and reports, as well as to build relationships with other digital associations in France and abroad. It will also make sure that its members’ rights and expectations are taken into consideration by the government, legislators, regulatory bodies, the media, and other types of market organizations.Showing that FinTech has become a key topic in the French political agenda, France FinTech’s launch benefited from the dual support of the French National Secretary for the Digital Economy (Ms Axelle Lemaire) and the French Minister of Finance and Economy (Mr Michel Sapin). Ms Axelle Lemaire commented:
The challenges facing the financial industry are those of our entire economy. For this 
industry to be a key player in the digital revolution, it takes simplicity, trust and strong support to French start‐ups and innovation. The French government also needs the (FinTech) industry to structure itself. This is the rationale for the creation of the FinTech France association, which I welcome.
And Mr Michel Sapin, reinforcing the previous message:
FinTech is a major challenge for the development of innovative financial services for all; consumers have a stake in that new players jostle established players from the financial sector.
In conclusion, France has some strengths to build on when dealing with FinTech: 
a strong base of financial and tech skills, a “decent” and rapidly growing financing infrastructure, and noteworthy French state tax incentives. Entrepreneurs and investors in the FinTech sector should keep France on their radar screen. Who knows? The Lending Club of 2020 could well have been founded by a French guy, but this time in France.
13 See www.francefintech.org/.47FinTech hubsThe Journey Towards an 
Integrated FinTech  Ecosystem – The Netherlands
By Don Ginsel 
Founder, Holland FinTech
Holland FinTech was launched in 2014 with the goal to build a FinTech ecosystem 
with a base in Amsterdam. Holland FinTech brings together the different players in the Dutch FinTech space, linking them to global developments via our newsletter, research, and international trips. As a local hub, we are well on our way with over 65 members on board, ranging from FinTech start‐ups to banks, and from investors to government agencies. Increasingly we are expanding our international reach.
But we are not there yet. There are still many hurdles to overcome for FinTech in 
general. We do not consider ourselves experts in building FinTech ecosystems yet but think that sharing our journey may help others on a similar quest.
Netherlands in 2014
Back in 2014, FinTech in the Netherlands was about as dormant as in most other countries in continental Europe. Only a very small group of internationally well‐connected financial professionals knew about this new thing called FinTech, a term being used in Silicon Valley, New York, and London. FinTech was only used to address the main IT suppliers of the financial industry. But FinTech start‐ups were something nobody had ever heard of or thought about. Given the quite innovative financial landscape, this was a missed opportunity, especially since the Netherlands have been competing on a global scale for some time in the payments and security arena. So what caused this disconnect?
For the relatively large financial industry in the Netherlands, the financial crisis was 
still not over. Dealing with a lagging economy, staff reductions, increasing compliance regulation, and finalizing governmental bailout measures were top priorities. Combined with public and political scrutiny around bonuses and non‐transparent financial products, financial institutions just had different things on their minds.Not only was there a lack of serious competition to drive innovation in the first place, but also there was a lack of political awareness about financial innovation. Moreover, with the financial crisis being caused by “innovative” financial products, the topic of innovation in this sector was highly sensitive. In addition, Holland Financial Centre, the Dutch organization that had as one of its tasks to promote innovation in the financial industry, was forced to close due to the negative sentiment towards the financial industry. Basically the Dutch financial industry was innovation‐disabled and had nowhere to turn for support.
So how about start‐ups and tech companies? Were there really no companies 
in the Netherlands? Apparently the term FinTech had not really hit the ground before 2014. Most of the relevant companies simply considered themselves IT companies, like thousands of others. Many of them were either unaware of the opportunity that the international rise of FinTech offered or else they didn’t know how to be associated with it. And the local venture capitalists were not picking up on the FinTech opportunity either, except for a few that were already active in London or beyond.
But there was one area where the Netherlands was already ahead of the FinTech 
competition: payments. The Dutch have had some great payment solutions both via banks (iDeal) and young tech companies like Global Collect and Adyen. For a trader nation like the Netherlands, it was obvious e‐commerce developments were driving new solutions forward, especially those related to financial processes.
Seizing the Opportunity
Given the large potential of innovative payments from the Netherlands and the strong enterprise IT capabilities (infrastructure, security, ERP & Trade software), the FinTech potential of the Netherlands is quite considerable. This, combined with an excellent infrastructure (one of the busiest internet nodes worldwide), a well‐educated population (best country in Europe to do business in English after the UK and Ireland), and a great international network, makes the Netherlands a great place to do business. So, how to set this in motion?
After confirming that there is an opportunity with FinTech to drive competition and 
bring new solutions that matter to entrepreneurs and consumers, the next step is closing the knowledge gap between financial institutions and their customers. This 4848
FinTech hubswill financially empower entrepreneurs and consumers to deliver economic growth 
and prosperity.
The First Step
Leveraging my network: how to align the various stakeholders in my network, at banks, start‐ups, investors, and service providers and make them enthusiastic about the idea of doing “something” with FinTech in the Netherlands. This took a lot of explaining to the industry. At first I focused on blogging part time, but as enthusiasm rose with each interview and discussion on the topic, it seemed that there was perhaps momentum for something bigger. KPMG’s team for Innovative Start‐ups was the first to bite, a good fit given their current focus on start‐ups in combination with having many clients in the Financial Services industry. Their team was a big help in structuring the concept and promoting it. Innopay, an advanced payment consulting firm, was the next to give verbal commitment, as this initiative was well suited to complement their payment expertise. They were very helpful in sharing the history of FinTech in Europe, before the term FinTech was widely recognized. Soon after Van Doorne, an innovative Dutch law firm, and IBM joined the group of supporters and the concept started to take shape. On 23 October 2014, we had our first meetup, with over 100 people attending, and Holland FinTech was born.
Early Choices
We called the supporters founding members and started setting goals and structuring the organization. It seemed like a logical step to form a bridge between the world of FinTech, as found predominantly outside of the Netherlands, and the local FinTech ecosystem that we were building. Therefore we determined that an international focus was paramount and decided to communicate only in English. The main tasks then were to get the FinTech players together, and to make connections to developments and FinTech hubs worldwide. This meant telling people about FinTech, reaching out to (potential) FinTech companies, organizing events, and setting up structured communication about global FinTech developments.
Since we had to convert so many people to start with, we had to get easy access 
to them. Providing free information through our website, a free global FinTech newsletter, and free meetups enabled us to garner the interest of the relevant parties. Besides this we took every (self‐created) opportunity to speak about FinTech and our cause when we thought relevant people would be there. While this meant our agenda was overloaded, being willing to go on stage and speak about FinTech remains a great way to get noticed.
One of the great things about working with (among others) start‐ups is their energy 
and resourcefulness. Their capacity to go a long way with limited resources was also required for this self‐funded initiative, very much a start‐up itself. So just rolling up our sleeves and getting this going, even when not all partners were on board yet, was important. This agility is key to the success of a start‐up, certainly in the fast changing FinTech landscape. Keeping stakeholders happy is also key, but not at the cost of inertia. This approach does however have its financial consequences and requires solid financial commitment from at least one shareholder. We have not been funded by grants or subsidies (so far).
As a privately started and funded initiative, it made sense to become a limited 
liability company. However, given the partly social goals and drive to tackle what is also a public cause, financial empowerment, many people also considered a foundation to be a good form to use. We have not yet done so, due to potential additional administrative hassle and perhaps even less transparency. Looking forward to when a foundation might help us to reach our goals, we may consider changing our legal structure.
Business Model
One of the things that I have learned is that asking for a success fee per transaction, which is the norm for M&A deals, makes it difficult to advise people objectively. But since we’re building a marketplace for FinTech, we needed to find a way to fund our activities. The membership fees are relatively low (up to a maximum of EUR 15k for billion‐plus companies) and free for start‐ups for the first year. This model should lower the barriers to entry thereby maximizing the number of members, increasing knowledge sharing and the number of business opportunities available at our marketplace.
This model allows us to do more for the network and community, since marketing 
and distribution are already covered. That means that setting up a co‐working space for FinTech companies, organizing hackathons, and/or running accelerators are all natural extensions since the sponsors, investors, and participants are already part of 49FinTech hubsthe organization. And the programmes can be run more cheaply due to overlapping 
resources. That makes a win‐win for all parties involved. It also enables us to listen very carefully to our members and to tailor programmes to their current needs efficiently.
Governmental Relations
Given the potential pull Holland FinTech might have on companies from abroad and the contribution to the financial ecosystem, we started co‐operating with the government at a very early stage. We maintain great relationships with our Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Economic Affairs, the Dutch regulators, the Dutch Central Bank (DNB), as well as the Authority on Financial Markets (AFM). These parties play such an important role in making or breaking the FinTech landscape, that we want them to know about and to support our objectives. Our discussions have been very constructive and there is a sense of urgency with all of the stakeholders that we cannot miss this window of opportunity.
One very important development at the beginning of 2015 was the creation of 
StartupDelta, simply put the “Ministry of Start‐ups”, led by former EU commissioner Neelie Kroes. This organization combines the forces of all start‐ups and service providers in the Netherlands, connecting them internationally. It creates a great momentum for start‐ups and attracts venture capital to the Netherlands. In particular, StartupDelta strengthens cooperation between start‐ups and large corporates.
Execution Challenge
So now we are well on our way with a staff of eight. We have organized ten events since October 2014, have 65+ member companies (90% Dutch), 1500+ newsletter readers, and 2500+ Twitter followers. Recently the top three Dutch banks joined Holland FinTech as members. We have identified more than 250 FinTech companies in the Netherlands and are expanding our geographical mapping. Since the city of Amsterdam has also embraced our initiative, we will soon unveil a space for our physical FinTech hub in Amsterdam, that will be a “must visit” for those active in FinTech worldwide, similar to Level39 in London.
But of course our organization is still at the beginning stages. Bringing in 
sufficient revenue remains a challenge when working with corporate partners. This also means that we work with a limited number of staff members and that we rely on part‐time and volunteer staff. Our team is extremely committed to building a vibrant FinTech community and has done a great job so far!
International Relevance
Setting up an organization that aims to manage the whole FinTech ecosystem in a region requires dedicated resources and the room to manoeuvre. The time must be right and you may be faced with extensive competition but that doesn’t mean that you should avoid activity around FinTech – rather it requires finding a particular niche. In London you see massive competition between organizations that facilitate FinTech and everyone, including the Mayor of London, is calling London the FinTech capital of the world. That alignment sends out a very strong message, one that most regions can learn from.
This story shares our journey in the FinTech landscape so far and our aim to 
connect to other people and organizations who want to be a part of shaping the FinTech ecosystem worldwide. We hope this vision will give direction for an integrated ecosystem approach.5050
FinTech hubsLuxembourg, a Future  
FinTech Hub?
By Nazim Faid 
Corporate, Banking and Finance Lawyer, Kaufhold & Reveillaud
In May 2015, the ICT Spring Europe Conference was held in Luxembourg. This 
conference focused primarily on the FinTech sector. With more than five thousand people participating in this sixth edition of the ICT Spring Europe, Luxembourg has clearly announced itself as a contender to become a world‐class FinTech hub with its unique ecosystem for growth.
If FinTech companies can help today’s banking provide better customer services, 
they have long aroused concern and distrust from Luxembourg financial players. However, with over 150 FinTech companies created in Luxembourg, most of which were incorporated in the last three years (and many more to come), the Luxembourgish market has now been made aware of the dynamics and undeniable importance of these start‐ups, which have already created over ten thousand jobs in the country (11% of total jobs in Luxembourg). The growing interest customers show in new technologies should accelerate the growth of the FinTech sector and give an even more important role to FinTech companies in the financial world. Luxembourg must keep pace with this technology revolution to continue to be a major player in international finance.
In the changing financial landscape, today we are witnessing the emergence of 
two types of FinTech: the so‐called “traditional” FinTechs, which are complementary to the major players in the financial sector, and the “disruptive” FinTechs, highly innovative and more at odds with the traditional functioning of the financial sector.
Luxembourg aspires to become one of the world’s major hubs for FinTech and it 
does have its arguments: according to the latest Global Information Technology Report published by the World Economic Forum, Luxembourg is ranked ninth worldwide when it comes to leveraging information and communication technologies. FinTech companies can also benefit from one of the most modern data centre parks in Europe.
The Luxembourg financial centre is a global market, making it very attractive for 
FinTech start‐up companies wishing to expand internationally by providing market intelligence, access to business networks, and close connections with other major FinTech hubs in the world.
If Luxembourg is presented as a serious contender to become a major hub for 
FinTechs due to its flexible regulations, highly attractive tax regime, favourable IT environment, and an effective data storage system, efforts have yet to be made in order to better connect the “Fin” and the “Tech” and compete with other major European FinTech hubs such as London, Paris, or Berlin. The focus of these efforts must be on two points: innovation and flexibility.
The ability to innovate remains a major challenge to Luxembourg’s ambition. The 
FinTech companies should not be considered as competitors threatening the major players in the sector, but rather as potential new partners. In a market in which increasing sources of funding can be made readily available to consumers, the difference now lies in the quality of banking and customer service.
Banks can benefit from FinTech companies’ expertise not only for their self‐service 
tools, but also to enhance their relationship with clients. The FinTech revolution is prompting many of the “traditional” players to review their organization as well as services offered to customers and become more client‐centric.
Many Luxembourg banks still lack the necessary infrastructure to face the global 
technological revolution, and thus maintain a cautious approach to this type of innovation. Be that as it may, a widening approach to innovation is gaining significant popularity amongst Luxembourg financial players. Collaboration is becoming increasingly important in the financial services and technology industries.
As such, a plethora of collaborations have been created between banks and 
FinTech companies: some banks have decided to buy out FinTech companies, acquiring their technologies in order to develop them “in‐house”, while others prefer to fund them by offering loans.
If Luxembourg wishes to fulfil its aspirations of becoming a world‐class FinTech hub, 
a major effort must still be made to access funding. Better access to funding implies not only private funding, but also public funding. By means of national agencies such as Luxinnovation, the National Agency for Innovation (founded in 1984 by several public entities), the government helps start‐ups in gaining access to public funding. In 2014, the government supported nearly 300 projects and has been involved in the establishment of 45 new start‐ups, of which many are FinTech companies.51FinTech hubsInvestment in FinTech companies grew by 201% globally year‐over‐year, bouncing 
from US$4.05 billion in 2013 to reach US$12.21 billion in 2014. Such growth clearly demonstrates that this sector shows promise and potential. Although the United States made up the lion’s share with approximately 80% of the total amount, Europe had the highest level of growth with an increase of 215% last year. If today’s banks are to benefit from the growth driven by the FinTech sector, innovation through cooperation and investment will be key.
Another major challenge for Luxembourg will be adopting flexible legislation 
to allow FinTechs to proliferate on a larger scale, particularly by facilitating the arrival of talent such as IT engineers. With more than 70% of its workforce being foreigners, Luxembourg is an international melting‐pot. Luxembourg must promote its business‐friendly environment to attract new talent and become a hub for the recruitment of high‐profile IT and financial specialists.
Although the present regulatory framework eases the integration of financial 
technologies into the financial sector, the country must further loosen its regulatory environment, in order to allow new actors to enter financial services markets. We expect the CSSF (Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier), the Luxembourg national supervisory authority, to enhance the current regulatory framework in order to provide an even more suitable regulatory environment to FinTech companies.
On 20 October 2014, the Prime Minister and Minister of Communications 
and Media, Xavier Bettel, presented the “Digital Lëtzebuerg” initiative to the Parliament. During a press conference held after the presentation, the Prime Minister highlighted the boost in Luxembourg’s economy with the arrival of FinTech companies in the country, whether in the e‐commerce, cloud computing, Big Data, or e‐payments technologies sectors.With this initiative, the government wishes to consolidate the country’s position in the ICT sector on a long‐term basis in order to diversify its economy, while allowing citizens to benefit from better and cheaper services that innovative FinTech companies can offer. This initiative will focus on developing innovation and access to funding for FinTech start‐ups and the promotion of Luxembourg’s attractiveness abroad.
The “Digital Lëtzebuerg” initiative is a clear demonstration of the government’s will 
to give a fresh face to Luxembourg as a modern, open, and connected country, ready to embrace the technological era of financial services. This initiative should bring together major Luxembourg financial players from the public, private, and academic sectors.
Luxembourg is without doubt becoming increasingly conscious of the challenge 
it faces, and the growing number of progressive initiatives taken – not only with “Digital Lëtzebuerg”, but also with various think tanks, programmes, incubators, and accelerators – are a testament to the Luxembourg financial sector’s readiness to diversify the country’s economy by assisting, promoting, and developing FinTech start‐ups both nationally and internationally.
We are already witnessing FinTech success stories in Luxembourg, and many major 
players, from both the private and public sectors, are helping FinTech companies achieve global growth. The development of the FinTech sector in Luxembourg should be increasingly successful as we observe the growing interest and support this sector is getting from the more conservative players of the financial industry.
The country is poised to swiftly adapt its already highly attractive regulatory 
framework to this new revolution, from which the entire national economy can benefit.5252
FinTech hubsVienna as the No. 1 FinTech 
Hub in Mobile Payments?
By Sebastian Haas
Co‐Founder & Managing Partner, MEP Mobile Equity Partner
and Reinhold Bierbaumer
Co‐Founder & Managing Partner, MEP Mobile Equity Partner
London acquired its position as Europe’s FinTech centre at a very early stage. 
Besides the size of its well‐developed banking industry, this is one of the primary reasons why London today is undoubtedly the FinTech Capital of Europe. While London maintains its dominant position, several regions and cities are investing heavily to establish their own FinTech hotspots. One of these up‐and‐coming players is Vienna, the capital of Austria. Vienna’s FinTech hub options are different from Berlin, Frankfurt, or Zurich. Due to different historical factors, Vienna has the opportunity to be a prominent FinTech hub in a vertical sector, namely payment and ticketing.
One of the most significant arguments for Vienna’s competitive advantage is its 
strategic location, historical banking connections, and certain unique factors. Austrian banks have approximately 50 million customers in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) and, through their subsidiaries in the payments area formed in the 1980s, collectively hold an extraordinary strategic advantage in the mobile payment race. This factor, in combination with up‐and‐coming start‐ups in the payments area, provides fertile soil for technological innovation which can follow on from some previous Austrian innovations, such as the Austrian health care e‐card in 2005, Austrian road toll technology, or the Austrian “Bankomatkarte”. It is also worth noting that Austria was the birthplace of NFC technology, the current industry standard for contactless payment.
The payment industry in general, and especially mobile payments, is essentially 
built on “cooperation technology”. As Confucius said, “even the strongest man cannot lift himself up.” The environment presents a truly unique opportunity for clever start‐ups to develop world‐class mobile payment solutions using this cooperation technology, due to the less complex stakeholder constellations, with just a few big banks, mobile network operators (MNOs), and payment service providers (PSPs) operating in Austria.This chapter deals with the starting position, the players involved, competitive advantages, and what this could mean for Europe and the mobile payment industry (see the Table below).
Table:  Starting basis – payment facts and figures
Austrian population 8.5m
Number of current accounts > 8.0m
AT banks customer base in CEE > 50m
Debit cards in AT (Bankomatkarte) 9.1m
Credit cards 2.9m
Smartphone penetration > 70%
Practically all Austrians own at least one payment card (1.4 cards per person on average), but compared to Scandinavians or people in the UK, for example, Austrians are still quite reluctant to use their cards. Cash is still king in Austria. A total of 12 million payment cards are used for less than 500 million payment transactions per year – approximately 420 million debit card transactions (with the Bankomatkarte) and approximately 80 million credit card transactions.
Austria at present, like Germany, is still a cash country, but all the signs point 
towards a strong increase in cashless payments in the coming years, for a variety of reasons and factors, coming from different directions and out of different motives.
On the one hand – and this is a significant change – policy‐makers have realized 
that a more cashless society correlates with less tax evasion, especially as far as VAT is concerned. The Austrian government recently adopted a law that forces businesses to install electronic point of sale (POS) terminals which are linked to the Federal Computing Centre (Bundesrechenzentrum), the IT service provider of the Austrian federal administration.
The second, and even more important factor is the specific Austrian payment 
infrastructure with just a few players and its relatively uncomplicated and straightforward upgrade path towards a mobile payment infrastructure from the retailer’s and POS side. The interesting thing is that banks and payment service providers are in a weak position to establish user‐centric and user‐friendly integrated all‐in‐one wallets, because of their lack of neutrality. This space is 53FinTech hubsreserved for either the big digital players from the US and Asia or neutral European 
start‐ups.
Specific Starting Basis for Mobile 
Payments
Though at present still a “cash country”, with more than 80% of transactions in cash, 
Austria’s position in the upcoming transition to mobile payment is quite unique. It looks as though, over the last three years, Austrian banks and the payment industry were able to create the foundation for a mobile payment revolution, which could even serve as a model for Europe.
The fact that Austrian banks have more than 50 million customers with current 
accounts in the CEE region is also one of the reasons why Europe’s payment industry should watch the mobile payment innovations that are happening in Austria.
But even more important is the fact that Austrian banks, through their affiliated 
payment service provider PSA Payment Services Austria GmbH, owned by all the Austrian banks, managed to get the biggest three mobile network operators, Telekom Austria A1, T‐Mobile and Three, to the table for what is probably a groundbreaking joint venture: the mobile debit card on smartphones (mobile Bankomatkarte), which in 2016 will also include credit schemes. A short keyword description of this project is:
•	SIM‐based secure element.
•	All banks and all MNOs on board.
•	Android phones only (due to Apple NFC policy).
•	Debit cards only (in 2015).
•	Credit cards in 2016.
The decision of Austrian banks and their affiliate PSA from 2013, to replace all 
plastic cards by contactless NFC cards until the end of 2015, puts retailers and acquirers under pressure to upgrade POS terminals to NFC technology. This move by banks, establishing the POS‐side infrastructure for mobile payments, is happening quite fast, indeed a lot faster than in other EU countries. This means that, after 2016, the stage for mobile payments in Austria will be set.
So from Q4 2015 onwards, Austrians have the option to use their debit card 
Bankomatkarte as an app on their phones, via different apps from banks and mobile network operators.
What Does this Mean for FinTech 
Start‐ups?
Austrian banks will give their customers the option to transfer their debit card 
Bankomatkarte to the smartphone. Though innovative and ambitious, all in all this looks a lot like fragmentation and complexity from the point of view of the customer and smartphone user. The key question remains: will the average smartphone user, as opposed to the pilot project‐friendly user, adopt this? This question remains unanswered.
Austria has two options going forward. On the one hand, it may welcome IT giants 
Apple, Samsung, Google, with their neutral wallets, as soon as they are ready to enter the continent. On the other hand, neutral start‐ups, cleverly positioned between the stakeholders and stakeholder groups, will have a tremendous opportunity here. The complexity of the EU payment space, with different regulations and different payment ecosystems, country by country, will make things difficult for the big guys from the US and the Far East. Chances are that five to ten years from now the dominant players in the mobile payment segment will be companies that nobody has heard of today, or ones that have not even been founded yet.
Local FinTech‐related Venture 
Capital Environment
There’s a small but growing pool of venture capital (VC) in Austria. But who are 
the relevant investors for FinTech start‐ups and what types of positioning and specialization are they fostering?5454
FinTech hubsA stable and crucial player in the local ecosystem is the Austria 
Wirtschaftsservice Gesellschaft mbH (aws), the Austrian federal promotional bank. Since 2013 the aws Founder Fund participates in Austrian ventures with high‐end European scalable growth potential. The fund takes equity investments up to €3 million and has a wide set of target segments. The emphasis of the current portfolio is on digital hubs and marketplaces. Furthermore, Erste Bank plays a significant role within the aws Founder Fund, by taking part in the initial fundraising with €3.5 million, and is also represented on the fund’s investment committee.
One of the VC veterans in Vienna is Speedinvest, which manages an already 
attractive FinTech portfolio (highlights are Wikifolio and Holvi). An impressive newcomer is Venionaire, a young, skilled team with a strong network within the relevant US venture capital centres New York (East Coast) and Silicon Valley (West Coast) which is entering the market. SevenVentures (ProSiebenSat.1 Media AG) is part of the Media Alliance Europe and therefore has the potential to scale successful start‐ups, their brands and products. As a launchpad, SevenVentures offers access to over 200 million European households. Austria is serving within the group as a test market.
Even family offices offer good development potential for ventures in Austria. 
Leading figures and renowned personalities act as business angels in their former fields of competence and offer structured approaches, similar to EUVECA‐compliant models, but endowed with more flexibility and strategic reach.Some general trends – alongside the ongoing boom cycle in the asset class venture capital – are larger fundraising rounds and rising ticket sizes. 
  Austria‐based Speedinvest 
and Venionaire scheduled closings of over €50 million in 2015.
As a specialized incubator and business development hub, MEP Mobile Equity 
Partners is focusing on the vertical FinTech disciplines of mobile payment and mobile ticketing. MEP is acting as a cross‐fertilizer between banks and MNOs, between incumbents and start‐ups. MEP places seed and early‐stage investments which offer a complementary and supplementary fit for the relevant mobile payment cluster. Along with others, MEP is supporting the establishment of a knowledge‐driven business development hub to create a new platform for cooperation and to enhance European capabilities.
Conclusion: Unlocking the 
Potential
A successful mobile payment hub in Vienna will leverage an existing infrastructure 
and involve organizational and business development capacities, including banks, MNOs, and further specialized corporate start‐ups, creating stakes in the payment industry’s value chain. Austria’s strategic location between Western Europe and CEE, its unique set‐up of financial institutions, and relatively small market size (which wards off significant competition, yet allows for the establishment of a scalable and successful solution) make a compelling FinTech case for the country.55FinTech hubsIndia’s FinTech Ecosystem
By Sukhi Jutla
FinTech Thought Leader
and Narendiran Sundararajan
Manager – Research (ICT) at Centre for Innovation Incubation  and Entrepreneurship, IIM Ahmedabad
Big banks, big stock exchanges, big enterprises, big emphasis on technology, big 
e‐commerce companies, big investments, and ambitious entrepreneurs making it big in the world’s second most‐populated country: all these contributing factors make FinTech breathtakingly big in India. In 2015 alone, investments in FinTech‐related start‐ups in India have crossed the billion‐mark
1 across the spectrum. The socio‐
economically diverse billion‐plus population of India also opens up wide avenues for FinTech activity, in terms of talent, innovation opportunities, and a massive market to serve. The numbers are telling in this regard – close to 90% of transactions in India are cash‐based.
2 Online transactions are also on the rise; internet and mobile penetration 
are close to 20% and 70% respectively3 and mobile internet users are forecast to 
pass the 200 million mark.4 Both the public and the private sectors are reaching into 
these avenues, leveraging technology and innovation to create lasting solutions, from bridging the gap in access to financial services in underserved markets, to capturing the increasingly smart and networked mobile population with cutting edge mobility.
Innovation Areas
Against this backdrop of innovation and investment, one can see continued growth and opportunities in the private sector. One of India’s first online marketplaces focused on personal financial products, BankBazaar has secured INR 375 crores (US$60 million) in its latest funding round.
5 Established in 2008, BankBazaar 
continues to position itself to keep growing its customer base and to invest in its mobile app as customers increasingly turn to their mobiles to access such services. With more people turning to their mobiles as the first point of interaction with the site, it will become increasingly important to ensure that the company, as well as future start‐ups, incorporates mobile apps as an integral feature.
Jocata is another prominent FinTech company that offers Know‐Your‐Client (KYC) 
and Anti‐Money Laundering (AML) products. The technology is supporting a reduction in the cost of compliance by helping to meet regulatory expectations as well as providing standardized and reusable data from its customers. Selected for FinTech Innovation Lab run by Accenture,
6 it is clear that the world is willing to 
invest in Indian start‐ups due to their obvious potential.
Traditional banks are perhaps feeling the heat from FinTech start‐ups as they see their 
fee incomes from online payments decline. HDFC Bank, India’s second largest bank, saw its payment fees decline by 30%.
7 In response, it has partnered with e‐tailers 
such as Snapdeal and Flipkart to launch a shopping site on its website to encourage customers to use their platforms in an attempt to reclaim fees from e‐commerce activity. The growing e‐commerce sector will continue to revolutionize the payments market as more people turn to the web to buy and sell products in this diverse country.
FinTech is also disrupting the social sector, with Milaap being one of the biggest 
online fundraising platforms. It allows people from around the world to fund and help communities in India in need of basic facilities such as sanitation and access to clean drinking water. By pledging small amounts of money similar to the micro lending business model, Milaap uses a network of volunteers to work with field partners to review loan applications and ensure the money is delivered to the end borrower. This has proven to be a powerful way to raise funds for those who need them, by bypassing traditional banks whose processes can be bogged down in bureaucracy and unnecessary delays.
It is no surprise that the FinTech scene is now disrupting the food industry in India, known 
as the “Land of Spice”. Foodtech start‐ups in India are becoming even more popular than the booming e‐commerce space. With the Indian food industry said to represent a $50 billion market,
8 there has been a rise in the number of start‐ups in this space. For 1 Trak.IN Funding Tracker: http://trak.in/india‐startup‐funding‐investment‐2015/.
2 Knowledge@Wharton: http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/tapping‐an‐appetite‐for‐
technology‐in‐indias‐underserved‐markets/.
3 Time: http://time.com/3611863/india‐smartphones/.
4 The Hindu: http://www.thehindu.com/sci‐tech/technology/gadgets/mobile‐internet‐users‐to‐
reach‐213‐million‐by‐june‐2015/article6785327.ece.
5 See http://yourstory.com/2015/07/bankbazaar‐com‐funding‐seriesc/.6 See http://www.jocata.com/news.html.
7 E27: http://e27.co/banks‐gear‐up‐to‐piggyback‐on‐the‐e‐commerce‐wave‐20150526/.
8 YourStory: http://yourstory.com/2015/05/foodtech‐startups‐india‐crowdpitch/.56
FinTech hubs56example, Feazt is a platform that connects food lovers across the city by allowing them 
to host a dinner party or be a guest. Guests will pay a set amount per meal and hosts are charged a minimum subscription fee and a sign‐up fee to use the platform.
A Collective Hub
With more and more innovations arising in almost every industry, it is no surprise that angel and venture capital (VC) funding is hitting an all‐time high. Indian start‐ups have now collectively raised $3.5 billion
9 in funding in the first half of 2015, which 
has surpassed the total value of deals in the whole of 2014. Helion Venture Partners, Sequoia Capital, Blume Ventures, Kalaari Capital, Accel Partners, Matrix Partners, Tiger Global, IDG Ventures, and Softbank represent India’s mix of active local and international investors, Bangalore leading investments with $2.43 billion, New Delhi at $1.43 billion, and Mumbai at $610 million,
10 cementing the success stories of 
innovations with investment merit. Running in parallel, the easing of regulations encouraged by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has facilitated economic growth. Owing to their existing infrastructure, Indian metropolitans such as Mumbai, Pune, Hyderabad, Bangalore, and Chennai are fast becoming a collective hub for FinTech activity in the country. These aspirational cultural and business centres have the complete backbone that FinTech hubs thrive on worldwide: banking and financial institutions in public and private domains, non‐banking financial companies (NBFCs), multinational companies from both production and services industries, back‐end offices, start‐ups and entrepreneurs, incubators, investors, and a pool of talent to drive the above.
The number of financial hubs in the country is also on the rise. In research 
conducted by MasterCard, seven Indian cities are ranked among the top 65 financial centres in emerging economies.
11 Mumbai, New Delhi, Bangalore, 
Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Pune, and Coimbatore were all listed in terms of their conduciveness to financial innovation and infrastructure, economic and commercial environment, growth and development, commercial connectivity, education, IT connectivity, quality of urban life, and security. Mumbai, the de facto financial capital of India, ranked highest among its compatriots. As an established financial services hub, it houses India’s vital stock exchanges and serves as the headquarters of many national and international financial institutions. It is also an investment capital that serves as the home of many VC firms and angel investors. Bangalore is often hailed as India’s start‐up capital, with close competition from Delhi, Mumbai, and the upcoming ecosystem in Pune. The pioneering IT giants of India – Wipro, Infosys, and TCS – all began their operations from Bangalore, and have been key players in IT and back‐end support for financial institutions. This set the precedent for the city’s wealth of entrepreneurs and investment capital. These cities, along with growing innovation hubs such as Chennai and Hyderabad, have become a testing ground for various FinTech start‐ups working in capital markets, payments, microfinance, trading, and institutional tools.
The future of FinTech in India is set on a playing field of high aspirations, higher 
expectations, and a renewed sense of optimism. The government‐backed Gujarat International Finance Tech‐City (GIFT city) is a big step in this direction towards the future. GIFT City is an ambitious project serving as a massive International Finance Service Centre (IFSC) built with the sole intention of providing infrastructure for global and local financial centres to establish a base for their operations. Targeting enterprises driven by Indian talent in space‐constrained IFSCs such as Dubai and Singapore, GIFT City aims to be a booming FinTech employment hub. Jobs in FinTech are also generally on the rise in India. The Banking, Financial Services and Insurance sector alone generated close to 22,000 jobs. Among the centres, Pune topped the list in job creation, with all the cities mentioned above showing growth in new jobs.
12 This comes as no surprise given that companies such as SunGard, 
Fundtech, MasterCard, Fiserv, and First Data already have centres in Pune, with MasterCard developing their largest technology hub outside the US in the city.
13
To sum up the outlook of India as a FinTech hub, we need to view the entire country as constituting a collective hub of FinTech activity. With its various metropolitan areas focusing on different interests and tackling diverse challenges with regards to financial services, the common backbone that drives these cities is the spirit of innovation, the support of regulators, and the promise of investment. Unlike FinTech hubs worldwide, its legacy will not be one that banks on its established status, but rather on the development it can establish across the country.
9 YourStory: http://yourstory.com/2015/07/half‐year‐2015‐funding‐report/.
10 TheNextWeb: http://thenextweb.com/in/2015/07/05/india‐the‐worlds‐fastest‐growing‐startup‐
ecosystem/.
11 MasterCard: http://www.mastercard.com/us/company/en/newsroom/pr_new_mastercard_
research_ranks_65_Cities_in_emerging_markets.html.12 ASSOCHAM: http://assocham.org/newsdetail.php?id=4210.
13 Economic Times: http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/articleshow/46127416.cms?utm_
source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst.
FinTech hubs57Singapore, the FinTech Hub for 
Southeast Asia
By Markus Gnirck
Co‐Founder, Startupbootcamp FinTech
and Gerben Visser
Managing Partner, Incubasia Ventures
From many perspectives, Singapore is seen as a global example for tremendous 
development and unparalleled growth over the past 50 years. Strategically located at the crossroads of a regional development that will consolidate a region larger than Europe (in terms of growth, population, and promising demographics), Singapore has incredible potential to bring the world to Asia, and Asia to the world.
Singapore’s international presence is built on the basis of a stable country, stringent 
regulatory framework, and efficient administrative procedures, while its strategic positioning makes it an ideal launch‐pad for regional development into larger and more highly populated countries like Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam, and the Philippines.
Drivers of FinTech in Singapore
Based on the Global Financial Centres Index, Singapore is ranked the 4th largest financial centre in the world, and is also ranked in 1st place on the World Economic Forum Global Information Technology Report 2015. This confluence of financial maturity and technological readiness is critical for the acceleration of the FinTech industry, and naturally points to Singapore as a FinTech hub.
While FinTech is a global movement that has gained a lot of traction and 
momentum, it is important to recognize that the various geographies have different drivers in their respective ecosystems. Comparing the highly developed economies within Europe and the US against the developing economies within Asia, it is clear the drivers vary. FinTech in developed economies comes from a basis of innovation and adding value, while FinTech in developing economies is propelled by a critical need to address pain points, which are acutely felt in their respective economies.Generalizing the drivers for FinTech in Asia is thorny as there is a healthy mix of developed and developing economies in the region. Taking a regional perspective, financial inclusion is still a key issue that, if left unaddressed, inhibits the development of financial maturity within many of these economies. Therefore, be it for altruistic reasons or merely good business sense, consciously or unconsciously, many FinTech companies in Asia are addressing issues in relation to an aspect of financial inclusion.
Another key driver of FinTech in Singapore is the conducive business environment. 
Entrepreneurship and innovation are heavily supported by government‐related entities such as SPRING Singapore, International Enterprise Singapore (“IE Singapore”), Singapore Economic Development Board (“EDB”), and Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore (“iDA”). These organizations have been purposefully pushing initiatives aimed at encouraging and fostering innovation and enterprise in the local scene. Singapore’s strong legal framework also provides a high degree of comfort and stability for FinTech companies to establish themselves here.
The heavy involvement of the Monetary Authority of Singapore (“MAS”) in FinTech 
activities is yet another positive development for Singapore. Recently, MAS announced a Chief FinTech Officer who will serve as an entry point for FinTech companies into MAS, and an Innovation Hub similar to the FCA in the UK will be formed. They have also affirmed their strong commitment to FinTech by committing $225 million to the Financial Sector Technology & Innovation (“FSTI”) scheme.
Finally, there is a tangible surge in information sourcing and content generation in 
relation to FinTech. Renowned educational institutes like Singapore Management University (“SMU”) have established several centres such as the Financial IT Academy (“FITA”) or the Sim Kee Boon Institute for Financial Economics (“SKBI”), while several local banks have been exploring executive development programmes with an emphasis on FinTech. Moving forward, the circulation and iterative refinement of shared FinTech knowledge will contribute to greater public awareness, interest, and education, which indirectly drives a higher level of FinTech activity as well.
Singapore’s FinTech Ecosystem
Successful and thriving FinTech ecosystems are generally characterized by the presence of three key elements: (1) FinTech start‐ups and entrepreneurs, (2) investment capital to fund the growth of start‐ups, and (3) an educated community of mentors and experts.58
FinTech hubs58Firstly, although it might not be immediately apparent, there are more than a hundred 
FinTech start‐ups based in Singapore that are either looking into the Singapore B2C/B2B market or using the nation as a hub to operate across the region. Looking into the verticals within FinTech, start‐ups represent common trends that are seen worldwide, from payments to trading to blockchain technology and back office solutions. Many financial professionals, inspired by the success of others and attracted by the supportive environment, are leaving their cubicle lives to start their own companies.
Secondly, in recent years many local and global venture capitalists (VCs) have 
been closely observing the development of the FinTech industry in South East Asia. Even though it is a fairly new industry, especially for VCs, first investments have been made and these freshly raised funds will be an important stream of capital investment for the FinTech industry. As most start‐ups across various tech industries in this region are looking into B2C products, VCs are getting very excited about scaling B2C FinTech solutions for South East Asia. Additionally, many banking/hedge fund/private equity professionals are starting to invest private capital in early‐stage start‐ups to fund growth, while sharing insights and bridging important connections with key players in the industry.
Thirdly, it is also notable the FinTech community of mentors, experts, and angels 
is growing rapidly. Events like Echelon, Tech in Asia, FinTech Social, Next Bank Meetup, Hackathons, and Pitch Days draw large crowds of entrepreneurs and financial professionals that are keen to be part of the community and join the growing FinTech movement. Compared to other financial centres in Asia, the strength of Singapore’s FinTech community makes a difference and provides a great foundation for entrepreneurs, financial institutions, and investors to work together. FinTech start‐ups all over Asia are recognizing this fact and moving to Singapore to grow their business. Even start‐ups that have a large home B2C market, such as India and Indonesia, come to Singapore, knowing that acquiring FinTech knowledge is crucial to their success, and the openness of mentors to help is unique in this region.
Taking a broader view on the FinTech ecosystem in Singapore, the key market 
participants include the government and regulatory bodies, investors, FinTech companies, financial institutions, technology and telecommunications companies, business associations/societies, and other stakeholders.
These market participants in Singapore have a privileged glimpse into the 
future by looking at some of the more mature economies in Europe and the US. Already, we are seeing the established financial institutions in Singapore mirroring some of the strategies adopted overseas, such as establishing innovation centres, partnering with accelerators and incubators, establishing venture capital arms to acquire FinTech companies, and forming partnerships and deals with FinTech companies. Though the incumbent technology and telecommunications firms have been carefully staying out of the spotlight, a closer look would reveal that they too have clearly not been idle in this critical period of the FinTech revolution.
Another exciting opportunity for FinTech in Singapore is using synergies across 
other tech sectors. As FinTech plays an important role in everyone’s daily life, there is good reason to integrate solutions with other sectors, such as Health Tech, Education Tech and Smart Cities. The Singapore government is also investing efforts in bringing tech industries together and providing an even better environment for deeper integration. This is a welcome move, as FinTech should not just be limited to its own silo, but have the opportunity to create an impact on many different layers of a consumer’s life.
For Singapore to truly emerge as a FinTech hub, there is a need for a representative 
organization to bring these key participants together, to create a bridge between the large corporations in the central business district, the start‐ups in the grassroots, and many other organizations in the value chain in‐between and also across different lifecycles.
Success Stories
The success of a FinTech ecosystem can be measured by the number of businesses that have successfully raised funds and are generating revenue. While Singapore has not had a big FinTech exit yet, a large number of companies are proving that South East Asia is the place for FinTech at the moment. The world’s first Blockchain Hackathon, in 2015, produced more than 16 blockchain teams that will change the perspective on how banks and other financial institutions can work with this new technology.
Looking at some of the success stories of FinTech hubs around the globe, many of 
them share a common factor in having a representative/unitary organization lifting up and supporting the entire FinTech ecosystem in their respective economies. 
FinTech hubs59To name but a few, “Innovate Finance” in the UK, “Stone & Chalk” in Australia, 
and “Holland FinTech” in the Netherlands are some well‐established examples of such organizations while “FinTech HK” in Hong Kong and “The Singapore FinTech Consortium” in Singapore are quickly establishing their presence and building the FinTech community in their respective economies too.
Finally, a leading accelerator on financial innovation, Startupbootcamp FinTech, was 
launched during the London FinTech delegation to Singapore, led by London Mayor Boris Johnson. It has been successful through the involvement of regulators in its innovation programme, and paves the way for a more inclusive discussion on the evolution and growth of FinTech in Singapore.
Collectively, these factors have led to a rising number of FinTech start‐ups in these 
communities, which correlates to the greater intensity of investment activities as well. Clearly, establishing such an environment would be crucial for regions/cities looking towards building their FinTech capabilities.
Conclusion
Looking ahead to the future, there is no doubt that Singapore will continue to play a leading role as a hub for the development of FinTech in the region. Singapore will be a springboard into the ASEAN countries and the broader Asian region, which represent an incommensurable pool of growth. FinTech companies in Singapore are poised to soar, as they tackle a minefield of unmapped challenges in the landscape, while exploiting lurking opportunities in the course of continuously seeking and applying innovative FinTech solutions to make financial systems more efficient.60
FinTech hubs60Emerging 
Markets and Social Impact4According to the G20, 2.5 billion adults are excluded 
from the formal financial system. This part considers the influence of FinTech on emerging markets and the social impact that can be generated through financial technology in terms of ensuring access to financial services and products for the unbanked, i.e. democratizing finance. The cash economy is being supplemented by mobile access to digital funds. This change is not led by traditional banks but by telecoms companies who power mobile transactions. FinTech start-ups can become the engine that enables access to those in need. FinTech can help the unbanked to overcome discrimination in the provision of financial services, while decreasing friction and transaction costs for savings and payments.FinTech: The Not So Little 
Engine That Can
By Susan Joseph 
Founder, Leverige LLC
Back in 1930 when the financial world was in a precarious state, Platt and Munk 
wrote these famous words of encouragement, “I think I can, I think I can”, in The Little Engine That Could. The world had taken a nose dive and the financial markets imploded. Since then, we have legislated, transformed, and chugged along at a modest pace. For a time, that strategy served us well in avoiding another full‐scale financial meltdown, but it has also led to the emergence of a closed‐off and closed‐minded, but interdependent global financial ecosystem, in which regulation has kept innovative challengers at bay.
As some of the post‐1930 regulations became more relaxed, we were drawn 
into a global financial crisis in 2008, resulting in new and sweeping regulations. Simultaneously, technology is rapidly evolving and powering the world’s financial ecosystems. New regulations plus new technology lead us to one place: a full‐scale revolution powered by FinTech. We are in the midst of the golden age of FinTech and it is an uncertain, exciting time that will leave us much better equipped to grow the world’s economy in the future. There is a lot to do, but even tackling the tip of the iceberg to improve society by using financial technology is a great start. This is at the heart of the issues facing emerging markets.
Most emerging market economies have limited financial system infrastructure. 
Capital markets, to the extent they exist, and banks alike rely on legacy technology and are not accessible to poor rural populations which comprise a majority in developing countries. On the upside, there are far fewer structural and regulatory barriers in the financial system to overcome in order to serve the unbanked. It is precisely this dynamic that has enabled new technologies to develop in service of the poor, and FinTech innovators have jumped in, in some cases leapfrogging the traditional industry with new services that provide access to the previously unserved.
To understand how this is happening, we need to first understand that in emerging 
markets “Cash is King”. The poor are invisible to the banking system. They use cash for most of their transactions and cannot access credit, insurance, or savings products we take for granted in the developed world. Most of the population is scattered across the countryside and often lives in isolated small villages. Mainstream indigenous banks have not been motivated to develop the branch infrastructure required to support this population. In emerging economies, entrepreneurship is both a necessity and a passion, as education and jobs are scarce. Unfortunately, without financial infrastructure, it is difficult for the poor and unbanked to start businesses and to pull themselves up by their proverbial bootstraps. Technology is literally the glue that bridges the infrastructure gaps.
It would be foolish to think the unbanked are not engaging in financial transactions. 
Surprisingly, the primary enabler in financial inclusion is not FinTech innovation per se. It is the mobile phone. Over the past 15 years, mobile phone penetration in Africa has gone from zero to over 900 million subscribers, with similar growth in other low‐income regions. More impressive is the fact that around 500 million of those subscribers have no regular access to electricity.
Specifically, in Kenya, in 2007, Safaricom, a subsidiary of Vodafone, the largest 
mobile network operator in the country, introduced the world’s first mobile money solution: MPesa. Safaricom users were able to easily adopt the service, because it was already installed on their SIM card, and, relying on a growing network of prepaid mobile networks, Safaricom was able to become a virtual monopoly in Kenya, launching a global mobile financial services industry. According to the recent GSMA (association of mobile operators and related companies) report, in December 2014 alone, mobile money users transacted a total of US$16.3 billion through 717.2 million transactions globally.
Kenya has enviable mobile FinTech solutions that developed countries can only 
dream of having. Systemically, this technology was able to develop freely in Kenya to serve the unbanked because banks were not willing or perhaps not able to serve the poor. The mobile technology serving the unbanked became so popular that the banked started using it. In fact, they demanded banks implement it.
So, how much of the population in Kenya uses mobile technology for financial 
services? An estimated 85% of all adults use mobile money services to flow monies through mobile telecommunications carriers. These transactions are not flowing through banks. Practically, this means people are using mobile wallets with accounts based on phone numbers rather than bank accounts. Secure cashless payments are flowing across different emerging market borders, bypassing banks.66
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact66The sheer volume and total amount of money transfers and big data generated 
by these mobile networks makes it possible for carriers to expand their services beyond payments to deposit taking and even micro‐lending. Safaricom has recently launched two such services in collaboration with local banks – mShwari in collaboration with Commercial Bank of Africa (CBA) and KCB‐Mpesa, with Kenyan powerhouse Kenya Commercial Bank Group (KCB).
The biggest, most earth‐shattering fact to understand, and one that is worth 
repeating, is that the unbanked are being reached. The cash economy is being supplemented by mobile access to digital funds. Traditional banking is not leading the change. Telecommunication companies have stepped in and mobile powered transactions are the force to be reckoned with. Disruptive? Yes. Transformative? You bet!
Will digital money fully replace cash? Probably not. But the widespread reach of 
digital money transactions to the unbanked is fuelling emerging market economy growth, creating more wealth, and improving the standard of living.
We are about to enter the second stage of this revolution as feature phones are 
replaced by smartphones, with their adoption expected to reach over 70% of emerging markets by 2020. The opportunities for FinTech innovation are endless, and start‐ups can become the engine that enables access and directs resources to those most in need. Now let us take a stroll through two of the most imaginative ideas around that can transform people’s lives for the better.
The first creative idea is a credit insurance product that will be introduced in 
Rwanda via a big data platform. Only 20 years ago the Rwandan population suffered unimaginable genocide and horror, and the country is still in the process of rebuilding itself. Today, Rwanda’s economy is growing at an average of 8% per year. Can the economy be driven even faster? Yes, with FinTech‐powered credit insurance, which enables banks to minimize the risk of default and feel secure enough to lend to previously unreachable borrowers. Using existing and alternative data and advanced modelling, the insurer is knocking down the Berlin Wall of lack of access to credit byte by byte rather than brick by brick.
Once the secret sauce of data points and algorithms behind the product is online, 
the platform will be able to automate underwriting, loan origination, and the issuance of credit insurance. The loans and insurance products will be deployed 
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.quickly and have the ability to scale. The same platform and technology can be leveraged to provide key performance indicators and indices, shedding light on the previously hidden sector, and enabling global investment in the market. As these products go live, financial education and literacy programmes will still be necessary, but the information gathered will help improve the focus and effectiveness of such programmes and the technology will help deliver them.
Imagine the economic landscape of a poor country with solidly growing small 
businesses – farms, produce stands, handicrafts, light industry, exports, etc. – the kinds of businesses that can create wealth and generate jobs. Also imagine you have data showing how those businesses perform and grow. Solid transparent data, easily transmitted via API.
1 Data that can be shown to investors trying to 
improve the country’s economy and infrastructure. Data that can trigger further investment because that data proves that the investment in small businesses is working.
This is an example of how FinTech can create a voice that can be measured for the 
unbanked. That which can be measured can provide the basis for new policies, encouraging positive economic and social change. Change grounded in real time, empowered by the data from Rwanda’s steadily growing economy. Lasting sustainable development will grow from this; strong communities will naturally evolve. Credit insurance in Rwanda will serve as a forerunner of credit insurance arrangements across other emerging market economies. Little by little, we can reach the unbanked and improve local standards of living. FinTech empowering social change? Yes, we can!
The second example takes place in Kenya. Kenya is enjoying around 6% GDP growth 
per year and is a financial hub for East Africa. As previously mentioned, 85% of all adult Kenyans use mobile phones, with business being transacted and liquidity being provided through those mobile accounts. The phones are not always smart phones with the capacity to host sophisticated financial apps, but they certainly are mobile phones which can at the very least move monies from place to place.
What exactly can this mobile technology do? Everything that would traditionally be 
done within the banking system, including supply chain finance, loans, both short‐term microfinance and more standard commercial loans, savings, revolving credit, 
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact67etc. All of these financial instruments can be accessed with the swipe of your finger 
or the click of a button. And they are occurring outside the banking infrastructure atop elegant, secure, and neat mobile technology.
One of the more interesting lessons to be learned from emerging economies is 
that strong and powerful mobile tools and technologies have developed free of the stranglehold of legacy financial systems and siloed technology and regulation. It is much easier to innovate when you can start from scratch.
What has occurred to date is only the beginning. Marketplace lending is coming and 
can be enabled through mobile. A new FinTech start‐up is developing an international lending platform that acts as an online portal for capital investment. It provides foreign investors access to local businesses that need loans for working capital, fixed assets, and other investments for growth. In particular, this platform works with local small and medium‐sized financial institutions to access and originate small business loans. The platform then uploads these loans for resale to investors as graded investment notes. That’s right. Graded investment notes. Accessed via mobile. Securitization is coming through transparent instruments in Kenya and will be available in the palm of your hand. Capital markets are developing right before your eyes. Congratulations to those entrepreneurs bringing this change.
FinTech has thrown down the gauntlet. The challenge is on to move emerging 
markets forward. There are so many financial technology start‐ups popping up each day, it is hard to know which ones will survive. What we do know is that emerging market economies using FinTech innovation are the true winners, as need gives rise to financial innovation. The very fabric of financial transactions is being rewoven and the underserved are being served through FinTech. We are in the midst of a FinTech revolution and those words written by Platt and Munk were never more relevant than today. What we dream rapidly becomes reality as we speak the ideas out loud and act to implement solutions.
It is “I think I can” at its best.68
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact68Why Am I Not Gonna Be Able 
to Enter a Bank?
By Francisco Meré Palafox
CEO & Co‐Founder, Bankaool, S.A. Institución de Banca Múltiple 
“It is so far away and I waste so much time and money to cash my paycheck. Once I 
arrive at a bank branch, a disgruntled guard asks me what I need. He is a bit hesitant to let me in because of my looks. I wait in line for 80 minutes to cash my check. I want to be invisible. I am never comfortable in a bank. As I leave, I tuck the money in my clothes to hide it away from robbers in the bus. Because of the rain, it takes me forever to get back home. When I arrive, I light up a small fire to get warm and spread the bills to dry. I finally breathe, this time, I was able to make it safely home.”
Juan, 38‐year‐old Mexican
This story illustrates what millions of people who live in rural, suburban and even urban 
poor areas in developing countries go through on a daily basis. Financial exclusion takes a heavy toll on this segment of the population by increasing their transaction costs of managing money, not being able to participate in the digital economy, being exposed to theft and, sadly, being discriminated against by mainstream financial institutions. FinTech development is creating an opportunity to bridge many of these obstacles for millions of people and have a real impact on improving their lives.
According to the G20, close to 2.5 billion adults (about half of the working age 
population) are excluded from the formal financial system.
1 The story of M‐Pesa in 
Kenya and mobile payments using a feature phone has been widely documented as a success case. And while internet and mobile phone penetration has increased substantially worldwide, reaching 40% of the population in the case of the internet
2 
and, more importantly, 50% penetration for mobile phones,3 two questions remain:
Why have mobile payments not reached a larger majority?Why have service providers not evolved to provide a more complete financial offering such as savings and lending, nor leveraged mobile phone use to advance financial inclusion more rapidly, given the increased use of smartphones?
The answer to these questions may lie in supply‐side factors, including absence 
of an enabling regulatory environment and a lack of digital DNA in mainstream banks, as well as in demand‐side aspects, such as competition versus cash and idiosyncratic factors, including being discriminated against.
To cover and illustrate these questions, I will use the case of Mexico, since it 
represents an interesting case study of an emerging market facing relevant financial inclusion challenges, while having substantial mobile phone penetration and a strong and modern financial system. The banking system is solid and sound and has been assessed as Basel III compliant.
4 Mexico has also been 
considered as one of the most profitable markets for the global banks that have a franchise in the country. Notwithstanding, credit to the private sector as a percentage of GDP remains very low, at 18%. Also, it is estimated that close to 60% of adults in Mexico lack an account with a formal financial institution.
5 In 
contrast, mobile penetration is 87%,6 with smartphone usage close to 50%.7 
Mexico is an increasingly connected society, ranking 14th worldwide in terms of population size. However, Mexico ranks globally 5th in Facebook users, 7th in Twitter users, and 5th in Spotify users.
Supply‐side Factors
Seven large players that hold 90% of the market by most measures dominate the banking system in Mexico. All these banks have launched digital and mobile 
1 2014 Financial Inclusion Action Plan. Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, https://g20.
org/wp‐content/uploads/2014/12/2014_g20_financial_inclusion_action_plan.pdf.
2 International Telecommunications Union.
3 The Mobile Economy 2015 Report, GSMA. http://www.gsmamobileeconomy.com/GSMA_
Global_Mobile_Economy_Report_2015.pdf.4 Bank for International Settlements, “Basel III implementation assessments of Hong Kong 
SAR and Mexico as well as follow‐up reports published by the Basel Committee”, 16 March 
2015.http://www.bis.org/press/p150316.htm.
5 World Bank, http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinclusion/country/mexico.
6 Neomobile, “Mobile Market in Mexico”, http://www.neomobile.com/mobile‐market‐mexico/.
7 E‐marketer, “One‐Quarter of Mexico’s Population to Use Smartphones in 2014”, 22 Decem-
ber 2014, http://www.emarketer.com/Article/One‐Quarter‐of‐Mexicos‐Population‐Use‐Smart-phones‐2014/1011753.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact69platforms to better serve their customers.8 However, these platforms are only 
available to clients that have opened an account at a bank branch. That is, such 
platforms do not offer digital or mobile enrolment. Therefore, the problem persists, as new potential customers have to go to a physical branch and go through a cumbersome process to open a bank account. Not only does this process inhibit clients, but also the number of branches per 100,000 inhabitants is only 15.3, which is the lowest in the Americas for major markets.
9
Anti‐money laundering regulation in Mexico was amended a few years ago, aiming to reconcile the goal of financial inclusion with the need to prevent illegal money flowing through the banking system. The most important change was the introduction of a simplified Know‐Your‐Customer (KYC) procedure for bank accounts that have a cap on monthly deposits of US$1,000.00.
10 The regulations 
allow for a “not‐present” account opening process with reduced information requirements and no paper documents.
11 The potential for offering access to 
financial services to millions of Mexicans with this new legislation and thus fostering FinTech development is tremendous. Banks in general have not reacted rapidly to capture this opportunity, probably because of the comfortable position they enjoy in an oligopolistic market, coupled with their heavily entrenched legacy and their deep‐rooted branch DNA.
In that environment there is only one branchless bank in Mexico. Bankaool is 
the only bank that has so far launched a digital platform that enables potential customers to open an account with just a few clicks, remotely and with no documents needed.
12 Their platform has been designed with a digital enrolment 
user experience, and not with just “digitalizing” an analogue process in a branch. The account has all the features of a bank account (except for the limit).Digital and mobile enrolment for a bank account can not only improve the user experience and reduce substantial friction and transactions costs, but also, most importantly, can make a difference in financial inclusion and empower people in emerging markets to gain access to the payment system and the benefits of e‐commerce. While FinTech can be a catalyst for this change, regulators must create an enabling environment to make this a reality, as in the case of Mexico.
Demand Factors
“Going to a bank branch is like going to a hospital. The minute you set foot in there, you 
wanna get out immediately…”13
Pablo, 21‐year‐old Mexican
“My ideal bank would be one where there are no preferred clients.”14
Laura, 33‐year‐old Mexican
According to a report on financial inclusion by the Mexican banking supervisory 
authority,15 97% of adults in Mexico live in a municipality that has at least 
one access point to the formal financial system (bank branch, ATM, POS, or bank correspondent). However, from the sentiments expressed above, not only is there a problem with the offering, but even when financial services are available, the population is not likely to adopt them. As mentioned, close to 40% of adults have a bank account. However, only 14.5% hold their savings in a financial institution, even though 58.4% of adults save money.
16 How can 
FinTech help in improving the adoption of financial services, and particularly in enhancing savings rates?
8 In Mexico, Telcos are barred from participating in payments or savings. Only regulated 
financial institutions have access to the payment system. All savings accounts or stored value 
accounts that are open‐loop must be backed by an account at a regulated financial institution.
9 Forty‐seven in Brazil, 34 in the US, 24 in Canada, and 17 in Chile. Mexican Banking Association.
10 At the current exchange rate of 15.5 MXN per US$.
11 While the US$1,000 limit may seem restrictive, according to official statistics from INEGI, 80% 
of households in Mexico have a monthly income equal to or less than this.
12 See further https://www.bankaool.com/web/que‐ofrecemos/abre‐tu‐cuenta/.13 Focus group conducted by Bankaool, 2012.
14 Ibid.
15 Reporte de Inclusion Financiera, 2014, http://www.cnbv.gob.mx/Inclusi%C3%B3n/Docu-
ments/Reportes%20de%20IF/Reporte%20de%20Inclusion%20Financiera%206.pdf.
16 The World Bank. “Financial Inclusion Data/Global Findex”, http://datatopics.worldbank.org/
financialinclusion/country/mexico.70
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact70Well‐documented research exists on the topic of behavioural economics, savings, 
and financial inclusion.17 Such research shows that we can be “nudged” into saving 
more and better, while using financial products. Behavioural economics also shows that people generally save for a specific purpose or goal, and not necessarily for a rainy day. And while different instruments have been used to “nudge” humans into saving, such as pension plans and Christmas clubs, the use of digital, mobile, and FinTech can represent a powerful tool in helping people better manage their money. Companies like Moven and Mint have launched platforms for personal financial management to much success.
One area where FinTech and mobile banking will marry behavioural economics is 
in using commitment savings accounts. Commitment savings accounts are bank accounts in which the holder sets a goal for the amount of money to be saved for a specific purpose, as well as the savings time horizon, with periodic deposits to the account to be made as a commitment. Rewards for the fulfilment of the committed savings typically are paid in the form of additional interest. Gamification may also play a role in these accounts, as well as frequent reminders of the commitment to the user when they spend money.
FinTech can thus play an important role in the adoption of these instruments as The 
Economist recently pointed out:
… mobile technology can also help people to save … With mobile technology, providers 
can offer CSAs where the saver can customise the level of commitment that suits them. Bankaool, a Mexican bank, is one example. This year it will launch a mobile and online CSA for customers who wish to save a specific amount of money. The customer defines the target amount to be reached and the period over which saving will take place. The iWish account, offered by ICICI bank in India, is another example.
18
Mexico is a country where poverty and income inequality prevail. The country 
ranks 1st in poverty levels and 2nd in income inequality among OECD countries.19 According to a survey on discrimination in Mexico, 60% of people believe that wealth creates a divide among people, discrimination being the main response.
20 
Seventy‐two per cent of people believe that banks are only interested in rich clients and 67% believe they take advantage of the needs of people.
21 Not surprisingly, the 
further removed from cities people are and the lower income they have, the fewer bank accounts they have.
22
There have been debates on whether technology “de‐humanizes” the economy. Financial services in emerging markets might well be one of those areas where less human biases would be actually desirable. FinTech and mobile banking can help overcome discrimination in the provision of financial services, by changing the terms of the dialogue. FinTech can allow for a more direct communication and conversation between financial providers and their clients, without discrimination. A person’s ability to open an account digitally and perform financial transactions and save on their device will help to democratize finance and avoid discrimination. This will empower people to take control of their financial future and, no doubt, improve their (financial) lives.
The relationship between financial inclusion and economic development has now 
been widely documented. The challenge of including 2.5 billion people in the financial system is no doubt enormous. FinTech offers a unique opportunity to make exponential advances in such a task, taking advantage of the growing penetration of mobile technology. FinTech can help overcome discrimination in the provision of financial services, while decreasing friction and transaction costs for savings and payments. However, in order to make this a reality, a friendly and enabling regulatory environment needs to be put in place. Nevertheless, this alone is not enough. A change in the mind‐set of the players in the financial system as a whole is necessary in order to bridge these gaps. Disruptive FinTech companies and banks with a FinTech DNA will be able to develop real viral solutions. Thankfully, Mexico is an example of such an environment that fosters the entry of new banking players with a FinTech DNA.
18 The Economist, “What technology will bring”, 18 September 2014, http://www.economist.com/
blogs/freeexchange/2014/09/commitment‐savings‐accounts.
19 OECD, “Society at a Glance 2011: OECD Social Indicators” 2011, http://www.oecd.org/
berlin/47570121.pdf.20 Consejo Nacional para Prevenir la Discriminación, Mexico, http://www.conapred.org.mx/
userfiles/files/Enadis‐2010‐RG‐Accss‐002.pdf.
21 Parametria, “Los retos de la banca en México”, http://www.parametria.com.mx/carta_para-
metrica.php?cp=4555.
22 Consejo Nacional para Prevenir la Discriminación, Mexico, http://www.conapred.org.mx/
userfiles/files/Reporte%20D‐CREDITO‐Web_INACCSS.pdf.17 Dean Karlan at Yale University has conducted extensive research on the topic. See further 
http://karlan.yale.edu.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact71The Rise of the Rest in FinTech
By Stefano L. Tresca 
Managing Partner, iSeed; Author, Mentor and Investor
Would you like to have 2.5 billion customers?This is the number of “unbanked” – adults who do not use banks or microfinance 
institutions to save or borrow money. The largest proportion of these potential customers is based in Asia and Africa, with an outstanding 800 million adults living on less than $5 a day. This huge mass of humanity is not served by traditional banking because they were too expensive to reach. This is where FinTech can make a difference. Smartphones are cheaper and more popular than ever, with 1.9 billion users estimated in 2015. In this scenario, Android is the game changer. Xiaomi, a Chinese brand, came out with its first Android phone only in 2011, are on track to sell 100 million smartphones this year, and are already the second biggest start-up in the world, in terms of valuation (US$46).
1 
The consequences of this shift to being ever more mobile are massive: 2.5 billion unbanked with a smartphone are no longer unreachable! Two examples, the Malaysian start‐up Soft Space and Singapore’s SmartPesa, both provide mobile point of sale services and apps. They empower 600 million potential customers to send and receive non‐cash payments. This evening an old lady in Kuala Lumpur can run a street food stall without cash in hand, reducing the risk of being mugged. From her point of view it is just a tap on her phone, a tool that she already uses every day. From a financial perspective, she is pumping money into the banking system. Whilst the sum is small for each merchant, when multiplied by hundreds of millions of merchants every day, this cash flow could energize entire economies. Moreover, the profit generated by the companies behind these payment systems is going to inspire more investors and more start‐ups, thus generating more research and development, creating more profit opportunities, and so on in an unstoppable virtuous circle.
Being based in London – the world capital of FinTech – or even in Silicon Valley, it is 
easy to forget what is happening in other countries. It is the “The Rise of the Rest”, and it is here to stay.The Magic Cake
Alice H. Amsden borrowed the same phrase for the title of her book, The Rise of the Rest: Challenges to the West. In emerging economies, Amsden sees a direct challenge to the supremacy of the West. China, Taiwan, Korea, Turkey, Mexico, and all the other new members of the international financial playground want a piece of a limited global cake. In this vision, more guests at the party means less cake for everybody. Her book is brilliant, but I do not share this view about a limited amount of resources. The global cake has magic powers and its size can grow in tandem with the number of players. The West could share the cake with more guests and have a bigger piece for itself at the same time.
Think about M‐Changa, a start‐up from Kenya. Their app allows lending and 
micro‐crowdfunding for school fees, emergencies, and even wedding and funeral expenses. The concept is nothing new. This practice of mutual support – Kuchanga  – 
has been around for centuries, but this start‐up has made it accessible to hundreds of millions of people in real time. Their escrow account also reduces the risk of travelling with cash. M‐Changa was a member of Startupbootcamp FinTech, an acceleration programme based in London.
At the end of the programme, M‐Changa has raised part of their funds from 
European angel investors. This is not a charity operation, where the West gives and Africa takes – or sometimes is forced to take against their interest. This is a business investment, where everybody wins. M‐Changa gets funds, the investors get profits. M‐Changa is living proof that the Rise of the Rest does not necessarily mean downsizing of the West. Micro‐crowdfunding in Africa is a new market and it could serve hundreds of millions of customers. We – Western investors – may enjoy a piece of this new and freshly baked cake exactly because of the Rise of the Rest.
What Goes Around Comes Around
There is another benefit that is too often forgotten: thanks to the Rise of the Rest new cakes are baked in our own countries too.
Try to Google “prepaid meter” – the prepaid system for electricity. If you are based 
in the UK, you will see a list of the most advanced companies in the country, with almost half a million results. However, the first massive use and development of 
1 http://graphics.wsj.com/billion-dollar-club/.72
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact72prepaid meters did not happen in the USA nor in Europe, but in South Africa. Back 
in the 1980s, a large number of South Africans without a proven address or a credit history found homes in the newly‐built districts around the country. These customers tend to be served on a prepaid basis, because a subscription contract is too risky.
The most popular prepaid system at the time was inserting coins in your electricity 
meter. You can still see some of these old meters in London. Apparently a meter full of coins in your basement in the middle of a new South African development was considered too risky too. That is when they developed the new modern prepaid meter. Today, South Africa is seen as a world leader in prepayment technology and many other countries have adopted their standards.
There is Something New Under 
the Sun
Developing countries have large masses of new customers and few resources 
to manage them. This combination has produced negative results, until now. The masses with a smartphone are no longer unreachable. The combination of new customers and limited resources inspires companies and start‐ups to develop low‐cost but effective solutions, ready to be tested on the local market. These technologies may then be exported and adapted to the needs of the richer West.
Besides, this is not a dual market any more, with rich Westerners on one hand and 
poor customers everywhere else. After recurring economic crises and job losses, many in the Western population are struggling to make ends meet until the end of the month. Western customers are becoming ever more similar to their less developed counterparts than at any time in the recent past. Young unemployed and retired individuals – the first victims of this series of crises – benefit greatly from low‐cost technologies. Technologies that have developed in Africa or Asia could be more beneficial to these groups of people than the new fancy apps developed by a start‐up in Silicon Valley, London, or New York for wealthy millennials.
What is Really Happening?
I started taking an interest in Asia in the 1990s. It was Japan first, then teaching Italian to Koreans. Then backpacking in China and studying Chinese history. Step by step I have gone deep into the entire continent. During my years as a consultant I had a chance to work with India, Pakistan, China, Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia. I still follow what is happening over there and in the last few years the growth of the local start‐up community is staggering.
Here are a few successful examples:
•	Ezetap (India)
Ezetap is the Indian Square. They hold almost 80% of the mPOS market – mobile Point of Sales – in India. They have a strong presence “just” in one country, India, but this market has over 1 billion customers, more than the US, Canada, and Europe combined. Most of their customers are young and avid mobile phone users. Ezetap is also unique because they do not buy third‐party readers like Square, but have their own production and certification system. Their charismatic leader – Abhijit Bose – is alleged to be an Indian Steve Jobs, minus the bad temper.
•	Wedlite (Indonesia)Want to marry in Indonesia but don’t have the money? A wedding is definitely not a “business” that banks want to finance. This was a gap in the market filled by another start‐up, Wedlite. They allow Indonesian couples to finance their weddings with monthly payment plans. If you think that finance is a boring and unsexy subject, reading customers’ testimonials from Wedlite may just change your mind. Thanks to FinTech.
•	SoftSpace (Malaysia)Malaysia has one of the fastest growing mobile user bases in the world, if not the fastest, when combined with their neighbour Indonesia. Not by coincidence, the most aggressive company in the Asian B2B payment solution – SoftSpace – was born in this country. They have already expanded to seven countries, including Australia and New Zealand. Indonesia alone has 250 million customers, attesting to this region’s untapped potential.
•	Ola (India)FinTech is not just a geek game in Asia. Ola Cabs provides taxis as their name suggests. They first developed an app to call a cab. Then, because in India not everybody has a credit card, they have been “forced” to develop a wallet system to pay the cabs. Once transport and e‐wallets were in place, they had everything they needed to provide food deliveries. So they launched Ola Cafe.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact73Just one city – Mumbai – has 12 million citizens. Many of these customers are 
poor, but precisely because of this condition they are unbanked, without a credit card and often without a bank account. This so far neglected part of humanity could jump onto the wagon of innovation and use mobile wallets with more enthu-siasm than their Western counterparts. Not by coincidence, many see Ola as the real competitor for Apple Pay and Google Pay in the near future.
•	Blossom (Indonesia)If cabs and food are on the most traditional side of the spectrum, Blossom is on the opposite side, providing Islamic micro‐financing in Indonesia through bitcoin. The ancient tradition of Islamic finance meets the latest innovation of cryptocur-rency through Blossom.
•	WeLend (Hong Kong)WeLend, a Hong Kong P2P lending start‐up, has raised a series B round, raising US$160 million at the start of 2016.
2 This was solely to finance the opening of a 
presence in China, a market with over 1 billion potential customers.
China is a market that I have followed since 1996, and it may be full of 
surprises that come to light when reading the South China Morning Post or Tech in Asia.Conclusion
The so‐called “developing countries” are not just a market that provides customers and resources to Western companies; they form the base of innovation and investments. They can create disruptive technologies that we can later see transposed in Europe and the US.
You may believe that the Rise of the Rest is going to compete for our piece of 
the cake, or you may believe that they will actually increase the size of the cake. Probably these opinions could both turn out to be true. In any case, these countries are already part of the game and there is no going back. The only possible choice is to embrace the new order and make the best of it. The old Chinese saying is true now more than ever:
“When the winds of change blow, some people build walls and others build 
windmills.”
2 http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/welab-raises-us160m-in-series-b-financing-from-
khazanah-and-ing-bank-300207716.html.74
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact74Smartphones, FinTech, and 
Education – Helping the Unbanked Reach Financial Inclusion
By Cesar Jimenez Richardson 
VP, Sales and Operations, Strands Americas
Converging trends hold great promise for the next generation of digital money 
management solutions aimed at helping the unbanked. According to a GSMA report, mobile money services (MMS) are spreading quickly across much of Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East, reaching over 60% of the world’s developing countries.
1 However, the number of registered mobile money accounts 
has grown to just under 300 million around the world in 2014 and, as this represents only 8% of mobile connections in markets where MMS are available, there is significant possibility for future growth.
2
Many current MMS solutions are now tied to legacy mobile phone handsets but, as devices get cheaper, global partnerships fight for low‐priced data access, mobile operators invest to develop the necessary network capacity, and pricing models change to fit to local markets, the progress from feature phones to smartphones will soon be a reality in emerging markets. The “next billion” consumers in these regions will progressively become the focus of some of the latest innovations allowing the unbanked to be the first to leapfrog a branch‐based bank and become true “digital first” banking customers.
International efforts to build data delivery infrastructure, such as Facebook’s 
Internet.org, are looking to significantly cut the cost of delivering basic internet services on mobile phones, especially in developing countries. Internet.org is helping to promote the idea of “zero rating” mobile content, entering into partnerships with multiple operators in emerging markets to offer free mobile Facebook services such as their recent Messenger Payments Platform.Another version of the zero‐rating model – sponsored internet – has the content provider, instead of the end‐user, pay for connectivity. Banco Bradesco is a leading example in the financial community, having negotiated an agreement with mobile operators in Brazil, allowing the bank’s digital banking customers access to its internet banking service from their phones without incurring carrier data charges or having to use part of their monthly data package.
At the same time, network operators are also invested to develop capacity on 3G 
and 4G networks by introducing new and interesting pricing models better suited to the money‐based realities of an economically disadvantaged consumer base. For example, delivering a “pay as you go” data plan for prepaid users has become popular in Latin America and the resulting competitive intensity has reduced service charges by over half in the last three years, also increasing service affordability.
What will this shift from feature phones to smartphones mean for the unbanked? At 
a very basic level, people will discover an improved user experience, gain access to more innovative products, and benefit from a more competitive environment designed to encourage affordability at a rapid pace.
Enhancing User Experience
Feature‐rich interfaces and the greater ability to interact with smartphone applications will offer more intuitive experiences, facilitating user adoption in different market segments. For example, graphical and voice command interfaces (think Siri) in many local languages and dialects can help banks target people that are not comfortable with basic data services as well as consumers that are unable to read or write.
Since smartphone operating systems offer a common platform for developers – 
spanning specific devices and equipment manufacturers – mobile money apps can take advantage of a host of other functionalities, including integration with other features like contacts, calendars, maps, and social media apps.
App‐based mobile money services will also allow providers not only to tap into new 
pools of data, but also to generate insights that can help improve the efficiency of their services. Some of the current frustrations in MMS revolve around their agent 
1 GSMA, “State of the Industry. Mobile Financial Services for the Unbanked” 2014, http://www
.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp‐content/uploads/2015/03/SOTIR_2014.pdf.
2 Ibid.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact75consumers with useful insights that help them make better decisions and take 
control of their finances.
Many unbanked people in developing countries face limited access to micro‐
savings services at formal financial institutions, forcing low‐income individuals to find other ways to save. The average customer balance is over $10 for 40% of mobile money accounts.
5 This makes alternative savings propositions attractive to 
the unbanked, since their existing savings options tend to be risky (for example, investing in animals, commodities, or other goods as a means of saving). Moreover, people with low incomes can find it difficult to save cash, in part because the money is always readily accessible, meaning they have to continually exercise self‐control.
Once again, money management technology has the potential to deliver a range 
of online savings solutions for consumers and businesses alike. Strands, a global financial services technology company, provides financial institutions of all sizes with a white‐labelled
6 PFM application that can be customized and integrated with 
banks’ existing core processing platforms. It allows banks to offer their customers the ability to create multiple savings goals within a single savings account, and manage progress toward those goals through data visualizations that trigger alerts and notifications if users risk falling short of their goals. Linked to a mobile money account as a source of funds, and optimized for low‐income segments, such customizable savings products can serve as simple yet powerful financial tools for customers new to formal financial services.
Education: Power to the People 
through Financial Literacy
To maximize socio‐economic impact in emerging markets, MMS needs not only to 
reach the urbanites but also to focus on people at the bottom of the economic pyramid.network,3 such as proximity or those that have cash available (liquidity). An agent 
locator feature (such as Find an ATM on mobile banking apps) can be especially useful to new users. At a more advanced level, customers will be empowered to rate the customer service or liquidity of a network agent. This valuable data can be used later with advanced analytics and predictive models to forecast and prevent cash flow shortages, thereby improving the overall customer experience.
On the whole, feature‐rich interfaces and greater functionality on smartphones can 
offer a more intuitive customer experience, easing adoption and usage.
New Product Development
Greater smartphone penetration will accelerate the pace of new product development and will change how consumers engage financially, especially with merchants, businesses, and government.
To make sure this occurs on current MMS platforms, the general developer 
community will require easier access to the existing money rails network through the use of open Application Programming Interfaces (APIs).
4 While in‐house product 
development teams will develop some solutions, financial institutions must embrace opening the value chain that third parties offer when they layer new products on their existing platforms. This is core to ensuring current MMS organizations modernize the money management industry in developing markets.
Personal Financial Management (PFM) applications provide an instructive example 
of a product that can help the newly banked learn about, understand, and control their finances. Simple features such as a calendar application allow users to easily recognize their income and expenses in a chronological format that most people can relate to, but more importantly, alerts them to future expenses and cash flow shortages. The result is a tool that, using Artificial Intelligence (AI), delivers 
3 Agent Network: to access and utilize mobile money services, customers rely on two distinct 
channels. The first is the network of physical access points where customers can typically 
deposit cash into, or take cash out of, their mobile money account – these access points are primarily agent outlets. The second is the digital access channel – the interface that customers use to initiate transfers and payments directly on their mobile handsets.
4 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.5 GSMA, note 1, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp‐content/uploads/2015/03/
SOTIR_2014.pdf.
6 “White‐label” refers to FinTech firms which offer their solutions to banks so that banks can 
brand the solution with their own brand name (i.e. banks’ clients would not realize that the service has not been developed by the bank itself but by one of its FinTech suppliers).76
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact76In many emerging markets, a large segment of the population resides outside 
urban centres, without easy access to infrastructure like banking, transport, electricity, and roads. Rural populations represent a huge potential customer base in communities where mobile money is the only real competitor to cash.
Strategies to gain mass‐market adoption require industry stakeholders to identify 
and track usage by women and rural customers who tend to be later adopters in the traditional technology lifecycle (usually led by male urbanites). To raise awareness and attract these users, it is important to invest heavily in Below‐the‐Line (BTL) marketing campaigns that deliver the required human touch points that help educate people at the bottom of the pyramid. This could include visiting villages, plantations, and districts to educate women through workshops on financial services and the use of mobile money. Following their training in financial literacy, attendees could have the opportunity to open a mobile money account and increase the rate of adoption.
Another tactic could be to use real customers who are also active MMS users to act 
as sponsors to educate their peers about the use and benefits of mobile money. Operators can mobilize women from urban centres who are more active in MMS, to the villages where mobile money is not yet being used.Providing education and training for merchants is also important to gain trust and guarantee the interoperability of digital money for both P2P and the purchasing of goods and services. Clarity around settlements and how to access funds is important in helping merchants feel comfortable with the service and effectively manage their cash flows. In turn, they will be more likely to encourage customers to use the service.
The Road Ahead
The combination of digital money management, next‐generation smartphone technology, and a clear strategy to help educate the population at large will be revolutionary in the delivery of financial products that help unbanked or underbanked consumers to save in ways that fit their daily realities. I personally believe democratizing access to financial inclusion in developing regions of the world has the potential not only to unleash amazing business opportunities, but, more importantly, to help millions of humans improve their quality of life in some of the toughest regions of the world. Through the frictionless delivery of digital financial products such as micro‐credit or micro‐insurance, more and more people will have the opportunity to become financially autonomous, help build their local economies, and provide their families with the peace of mind attained through health and life insurance solutions.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact77The Social Impact of FinTech 
in Nigeria
By Daniel Steeves 
Consultant, Advisor, Architect and CEO at Beyond Solutions
The global village that FinTech enables brings markets and consumers closer, 
supports new businesses, and reduces reliance on the government in the process – and Nigeria, as the largest economy in Africa, is a growing and significant part of that global village.
There is no doubt that society has changed, adjusted, and progressed thanks to 
the technology advances of the past thirty years – and exponentially more since the turn of the century. The growing use of social media at all ages of the population is just one significant example of this change. Throughout all of this Nigerians – and the rest of the world – are really still just adjusting to a state of mind where online transactions do not pose a security risk.
From the Nigerian perspective this also provides a critical juncture to change 
perceptions across the global community by demonstrating not only the value and opportunities to connect with West African markets but also that doing so can be secure and fraud‐free.
Members of the younger generations are being brought up in a society where mobile 
phones and computers are part of daily life and where they are accustomed to using technology in all parts of daily life, but the impacts of cashless transactions are clearly seen as a benefit by all. FinTech can also provide safe banking access to the underbanked, in whom the large institutions have traditionally demonstrated little to no interest due to almost fixed on‐boarding costs and perceived low lifetime value in comparison with corporate customers and medium‐to‐high net worth individuals.
While FinTech delivers a positive impact across a broad array of topics, space 
limits the discussion here to the following three primary areas: consumer safety and security, contribution to state monetary policies, and support for small business and entrepreneurs.Consumer Safety and Security
In emerging African economies where consumer and business banking are not commonplace, FinTech contributes greatly to improving personal safety: 95% of internal Nigerian consumer payments today are cash transactions creating a broad set of risks which can easily be mitigated and minimized through the use of technology.
To exacerbate things, much of the Western world perceive fraud and corruption 
as great risks to working with and within countries like Nigeria and have been missing great opportunities to trade and transact with these strong and emerging economies.
Start‐ups such as VoguePay, based in the European financial centre of London 
and operating out of Lagos, can deliver secure mobile and online payment capabilities as a core part of their processes. From low‐cost on‐boarding and enrolment that ensures a complete match, validation and verification of user and business details through to rigorous tracking and auditing of each unique and non‐forgeable online transaction, these businesses leverage volumes to deliver cost‐effective value.
Secure and fraud‐checked online transactions are only part of the value delivered: 
the simple elimination of the risks of robbery tops the list but the use of the data being accumulated can support the creation of honest credit checking facilities, using analysis of social networking patterns to help lenders assess creditworthiness.
Contributions to State Monetary 
Policies
The perception of banks being slow‐moving, conservative, and ultimately averse 
to change is being disproven, primarily as the traditional banking sector is learning that it needs to react and respond to the disruption instigated by the FinTech sector. The agile start‐up sector is still far ahead, leveraging market opportunities with a focused and commoditized approach. Providing user‐friendly web interfaces – and 78
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact78accepting lower margins – on high‐volume transaction areas like cross‐border 
money transfers, delivering automation and simplicity to asset allocation, tax minimization, and investment advice.
FinTech is contributing to the national economy of Nigeria and supporting Central 
Bank policies to reduce the amount of cash in circulation (and cash handling costs). Reductions of this nature also help to limit corruption, leakage, and money laundering while increasing the effectiveness of other monetary policies intended to manage inflation and encourage economic growth.
Not only can Nigeria not afford to be left behind, there is a real opportunity for the 
country to leverage the financial and economic strength being delivered by FinTech to enable a growing maturity of fiscal policies and to seize a true leadership role.
While Nigeria does continue to spend most of what is earned from the oil sector, 
it has so far resisted the temptation to borrow or to overstimulate the economy, maintaining external debt below 3.5% and overall public sector debt stock at about 20% of GDP. It cannot be forgotten, of course, that banks remain at the centre of payment ecosystems – payment providers ranging from VoguePay to Apple Payments remain dependent on them for their infrastructure and as a safe (and regulated) repository for funds, although the providers of crypto‐currencies are working hard to change that reality.
But this doesn’t mean that there is incompatibility between regulation and rapid 
innovation: it is more of a disconnect, since both sides are there to serve customers’ needs and it is those customers, both corporate and consumer, who will make the choice. These choices are being made daily and are different from the decisions of the past. Flexibility and convenience are offered along with these choices and it is no longer a world in which the choice of where to bank needs to be a long‐term or permanent one. And, if banks and other financial service providers cannot forecast recurring revenues and customer numbers then they, by definition, are required to continue to raise the bar in terms of services and service … or watch their customer base continue to drift.
And when it comes to setting interest rates and implementing monetary policies, it 
is a becoming a completely different story.Support for Small Business and 
Entrepreneurs
By providing training, hands‐on support, pre‐built shopping carts and website 
integrations – as well as the ability to collect and send money directly from mobile phones without the need for a website – and by leveraging local presence and cultural knowledge and implementing strict anti‐fraud mechanisms, FinTech start‐ups like VoguePay are enabling these changes and helping to remove the traditional barriers to technology for thousands of businesses.
Reducing both fraud and bad debts in turn keeps the cost of lending lower which 
directly impacts the cost of borrowing, not to mention creating more opportunities for safe lending delivering a positive result for both consumers and small business via both direct lending and crowdfunding.
It is a common thread throughout emerging economies that there is a limited 
use of banking infrastructure, and an even more limited trust. However, results, social‐media‐driven word‐of‐mouth success stories, and recommendations about payments, transfers, and the value of crowdsourcing are convincing an ever‐increasing element of society to take advantage of modern approaches to finance for their own benefit. These innovations are global, are advertised by the users themselves, and provide compelling value to those users.
FinTech start‐ups support businesses – and other start‐ups – ranging from market 
traders and shops through to importers, exporters, and Forex traders in improving their bottom line with affordable capabilities that enable them to reach new markets and new customers – in the case of payment platforms by enabling secure, multi‐currency, and crypto‐currency payments across international markets.
By enabling business to start and to grow, sharing profits with developers 
and digital agencies, and allowing non‐technology start‐ups to secure their transactions, their latest acquisition goes a step further with an ecosystem that makes it possible for entrepreneurs to start new businesses with very low entry costs: another example of FinTech providing a positive impact to local and national economies.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact79Business as Usual is a Thing of 
the Past
In short, banking – and financial transactions for consumers and for businesses – is 
far from “business as usual”. New competitors from FinTech start‐ups and from other adjacent industries are flooding the market with convenient, safe, and easy‐to‐use products and services that were previously the exclusive domain of Nigerian banks, who are being left to watch their multi‐billion Naira monopolies slip away. It takes commitment, effort, and investment of time, money, and resources but it is happening on an increasing basis due to the simple tenets of quality customer service.
To fight back, the big banks are looking to collaborate, to innovate, and to enhance 
social banking but are their attitudes to service, delivery, low charges, and flexibility changing in time? Will they support the “unbanked”? Will their stakeholders allow them to take more risks on smaller customers – and the smaller profits that they generate? And, finally, can they capture the tech‐savvy youth and their expectations of a new paradigm of customer service?80
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact80India and the Pyramid of 
Opportunity
By Maneesh Bhandari 
Director, CIIE
CK Prahalad’s oft‐cited notion states that there is a fortune to be made at the 
bottom of the pyramid, a fortune built on providing solutions to the impoverished and underserved millions. The population of India is extremely diverse in terms of socio‐economic demographics. On such a pyramid, it shares a major chunk of these millions at the bottom and a considerable share of the wealthiest at the top, with a majority of its population in between (see following Figure). The population of 1.2 billion can be grouped by income into the vulnerable group (35%, 420 million), lower middle class (43%, 516 million), middle class (19%, 228 million), upper middle class (1%, 1.2 million), and the rich (1%, 1.2 million).
1(enterprises and entrepreneurs) are tapping into these opportunities with FinTech advancements being the key component in bridging the gap in access to financial services in underserved markets, and in capturing the increasingly smart and networked mobile population with cutting‐edge mobility. The numbers are telling in this regard – close to 90% of transactions in India are cash based.
2 In 2015 
the World Bank reported that India’s unbanked adults accounted for 21% of the world’s unbanked population. However, the growth in account ownership has increased from 35% in 2011 to 53% in 2014.
3 Online transactions are also on the 
rise, and internet and mobile penetration is close to 20% and 70% of the population respectively,
4 with mobile internet users touted to cross the 200 million mark.5 These 
significantly large and aspirational numbers show not only the increasing internet connectivity component but also the large spectrum of financial products and services that can be addressed to bring in financial mobility, forming a pyramid of opportunity for FinTech in India.
On that note, the crucial areas in India’s pyramid of opportunity for FinTech range 
from financial inclusion at the bottom right up through improving financial services and delivering cutting‐edge exclusive financial payments, to the top, i.e. right from social entrepreneurship to social network‐based banking and payment systems to capital markets. These are happening in the form of payment banks, lending, microfinance, insurance, foreign exchange and remittances, digital wallets, peer‐to‐peer, innovative payment models, investments, and trading. Enterprises and entrepreneurs have focused on simplifying technology and distribution models that create a greater impact, as well as disruptive technological advancements that have created varied use cases. Entrepreneurial success stories are abundant in this regard. Considering that India is among the world’s biggest peer‐to‐peer (P2P) offline lending markets, P2P lending, crowdfunding, and Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) online such as Bandhan, SKS, Milaap, RangDe, and Faircent have had tremendous success and impact by bridging the upper class market with the lower middle class and vulnerable population. Uniphore is another successful venture 
1 Approximate figures from McKinsey Forecasts for 2015: https://genesis.iitm.ac.in/downloads/
resources/startup/tracking%20the%20growth%20of%20indian%20middle%20class.pdf.2 Knowledge@Wharton: http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/tapping‐an‐appetite‐for‐
technology‐in‐indias‐underserved‐markets/.
3 World Bank: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/21865/WPS7255.
pdf?sequence=2.
4 Time: http://time.com/3611863/india‐smartphones/.
5 The Hindu: http://www.thehindu.com/sci‐tech/technology/gadgets/mobile‐internet‐users‐to‐
reach‐213‐million‐by‐june‐2015/article6785327.ece.Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojna,
Payment Banks,
Increased MFI Lending, Direct CashTransfer for subsidiesImmediate Payment Service,promoting NFC paymentsand digital peyment instrumentsEase of authentications,Alternative trading platformsRich
(1%, 1.2 Million)
Upper Middle Class
(1%, 1.2 Million)
Middle Class
(19%, 228 Million)
Lower Middle Class
(43%, 516 Million)
Vulnerable Groups
(35%, 420 Million)PayTM, PayU, Oxigen
Bandhan, SKS, Faircent,Milaap, RangDe, Uniphore
Figure:  The pyramid of opportunity
Seen in terms of development, progress is a complicated issue whose scope differs 
across the pyramid. However, the most significant element in this complexity is the wide spectrum of opportunities available for FinTech services in India, both in terms of adoption and innovation. Both the public sector and the private sectors 
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact81that provides speech analytics and voice biometrics to financial enterprises in order 
to facilitate easy verification and critical information transfer to rural communities in 11 regional languages. These are examples of where challenges in lending and interaction with underserved communities are seen as opportunities that could be bridged by FinTech ideas and technology.
Up through the pyramid, consumer‐facing apps and ideas have seen a strong 
resurgence of newer payment models in the form of gateways and wallets. Aggregators and e‐commerce apps across verticals – right from FlipKart and Snapdeal to cab aggregators (Ola and Uber) and hyperlocal delivery services have all reinvigorated the payments space in India. Taking advantage of the technological penetration in the market and existing regulations with respect to payment instruments, many Non‐Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) have adopted digital wallets and helped facilitate cashless and easier payment systems. PayTM is an e‐commerce and payment platform with a significant focus on mobile/digital wallets and merchant tie‐ups (most successful being the association with Uber) who are redefining the perception of payments. Another early mover in this opportunity space is Oxigen, a non‐Bank mobile wallet which is an RBI‐approved (Reserve Bank of India) and National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) integrated service. Using the NPCI’s Immediate Payment Service (IMPS), it enables simpler and quicker money transfer and remittances to 60+ banks across communities in India. In the gateway space, both the merchant and customer side of payments were riddled with redundancy and security issues. PayUmoney is a highly secure and equally successful payment gateway integration solution across payment methods,which has simplified the process on both sides. Capitalizing on the opportunity of India’s deep mobile (internet) penetration and high telecom growth, JunoTele is a start‐up providing real‐time and on‐demand billing and payment for services directly through mobile carriers with WiFi and offline.
Investment interests in the country are also growing. Venture capital from foreign 
investors has seen a steady influx into India, especially for early stage ventures. These early stage venture deals accounted for more than 82% of all deals in the technology sectors over the past year in India.
6 This interest from foreign investments 
is due to a variety of factors offered by the pyramid of opportunity in India. Growth in the size of the consumer segment as well as mobile and internet penetration are key factors. Tiger Global has invested heavily ($269 million over 11 deals) in the consumer space, followed by Sequoia Capital ($208 million over 14 deals) and Steadview Capital ($107 million over two deals).
7 However, only half of the venture 
capital flowing into early stage technology start‐ups is from within India, emphasizing both the foreign investments and the smaller, yet growing, segment of local investments.
8
On the other hand, policy‐makers and the public sector have focused on easing these innovations and in creating avenues for easier adoption and diffusion. The regulatory framework from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been working around financial services to create a robust infrastructure for development. The International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) recently rated the RBI and Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) highly in terms of financial market responsibility and capability.
9 The RBI in particular has undertaken various steps to ensure 
the flow of technology, such as removing the requirement of Additional Factor of Authentication for card‐present transactions of small value, promoting NFC (Near Field Communication) technology,
10 and increasing lending caps for MFIs.11 
SEBI announced in 2015 its relaxation of norms and its move to establish an alternative trading platform for start‐ups dealing in online trading.
12 This move 
is touted to open up trading and investment activity at the top of the opportunity pyramid. NPCI has also rolled out multiple projects such as: (1) ATM Switching; (2) mobile payments; (3) Cheque Truncation System; (4) PoS Switching; (5) Immediate Payment Service (IMPS, a 24/7 money transfer service); (6) RuPay; and (7) Unified Payment Interface.
13 The government‐led Pradhan Mantri Jan 
6 CB Insights: https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/india‐venture‐capital‐tech‐funding/.7 The Next Web: http://thenextweb.com/in/2015/07/05/india‐the‐worlds‐fastest‐growing‐startup‐
ecosystem/.
8 CB Insights: https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/india‐active‐venture‐capital‐firms‐2014/.
9 Economic Times: http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/policy/india‐secures‐
top‐most‐rating‐for‐financial‐market‐regulations/articleshow/47632065.cms.
10 Trak.in: http://trak.in/tags/business/2014/12/09/rbi‐cancel‐2fa‐smaller‐ecommerce‐
transactions/.
11 LiveMint: http://www.livemint.com/Industry/LM4OfETppTduXTLQD6BovL/RBI‐eases‐lending‐
norms‐for‐microfinance‐companies.html.
12 Reuters: http://in.reuters.com/article/2015/06/23/india‐sebi‐board‐idINKBN0P319K20150623.
13 MediaNama: http://www.medianama.com/2015/02/223‐npci‐initiates‐ecosystem‐for‐unified‐
payments‐interface/.82
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact82Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) is another mission of financial inclusion in both urban and 
rural areas, promoting the diffusion of bank accounts, financial services, and mobile banking at affordable costs. As of 24 June 2015, 164.3 million accounts were created, with around 19,015.42 INR crores (US$2.8 billion) deposited in them under the scheme.
14 Aadhar (universal identity) and know‐your‐customer 
advancements have enabled direct cash transfer schemes, which deposit subsidies directly into bank accounts.
15 The government has also set up 
differentiated banking systems in the form of payment banks to provide low cost and easier banking to the underserved communities.
The public and private sectors playing off each other’s actions have directly 
enabled the ease and adoption of various financial technologies and services. However, there are still many opportunities that remain to be addressed nationally, such as linguistic access to these services and the flow of money across accounts (51.86% of the PMJDY accounts currently have zero balances), which can happen only through enterprise development. The utilization and impact of the government‐allotted 10,000 INR crores fund for development and incubation of MSMEs (Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises) is yet to be assessed. The upcoming project of setting up a Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency (MUDRA Bank) would work towards the same goal and create similar opportunity spaces for enterprise development.
16 Telecommunication developments such as Reliance Jio Infocomm 
Limited’s highly spectrum‐invested low‐cost 4G services, and the government’s national optical fibre network to connect rural areas and gram panchayats (rural local governments) into the grid, might enable the backbone of infrastructure to facilitate positive action on this pyramid of opportunity.
All things considered, this pyramid of opportunity is continuously evolving, bringing 
with it fresh challenges to be addressed and thereby creating new opportunities that could enable us to see the pyramid as an aid to the development of the economy of the country.
15 Aadhar UID: http://aadhaarcarduid.org/category/direct‐cash‐transfer‐scheme/.16 Business‐Standard: http://www.business‐standard.com/article/pti‐stories/mudra‐bank‐bill‐
likely‐in‐fwinter‐session‐115070300655_1.html.14 PMJDY: http://pmjdy.gov.in/.
EMErging Mark Ets and social iMPact83FinTech 
Solutions5This fifth part of the book summarizes the latest FinTech 
solutions for both established corporate players and consumers. Business-to-business (B2B) solutions have been divided into those that strategically help banks to maintain their leading roles in financial services and solutions focused on either helping incumbents to be more efficient and compliant or more secure and better equipped to make holistic trading decisions.
Business-to-consumer (B2C) solutions include 
disruptive business models such as crowdfunding, global remittance payments, solutions for small businesses and other sectors. We will also focus on Apple’s entry into payments via Apple Pay, and the boom in wearables as the latest devices to provide financial services to consumers.Rewiring the Deal – The Path 
Forward for B2B Supply Chains
By David Desharnais 
Former CMO, Traxpay; SVP and GM of Digital and Commercial Platforms,  American Express
Thomas Edison did not invent the light bulb. Like so many visionaries before 
and since, the man who once claimed that “Genius is 1% inspiration and 99% perspiration” was simply first past the post in the race to solve problems with pre‐existing iterations. But even if Edison’s light bulb was not the first, it was the best. While previous models had proved unfit for purpose due to cost, longevity, and reliability, his was a shining testament to the power of innovation, and a reminder that behind every broken system lies a definitive solution.
Today, the realm of e‐commerce seems to be more characterized by innovative 
solutions than problems – at least as far as the average consumer is concerned. From the comfort of their couch, an online shopper can source and secure virtually anything at the touch of a button. Convenience is king, and our need for speed has been matched by the blurring pace of advancements in mobility, communications, and networking. With Business‐to‐Consumer (B2C) e‐commerce sales in the already mature US market expected to increase by 18% in 2015,
1 as well as the 
introduction of new transaction solutions such as Apple Pay, the B2C e‐commerce domain continues to grow at a breathtaking rate thanks to the ultra‐convenient technology that empowers the four billion (and counting) customers who currently shop on the internet. Little wonder that China’s biggest B2C player, Alibaba, raised a record‐breaking $25 billion at its Initial Public Offering on the New York Stock Exchange in 2014.
As deep as the goldmine of B2C e‐commerce runs, however, there is an even more 
lucrative territory to explore. One forecast predicted that B2B e‐commerce in the US would be worth four times as much as its B2C counterpart in 2014,
2 while another anticipated a gross merchandise value of $6.7 trillion for the B2B e‐commerce space globally by 2020, compared to $3.2 trillion for B2C.
3
On the surface, such statistics paint a healthy picture of the B2B e‐commerce landscape, but in reality they may be more representative of the market’s potential than confirmation that everything is rosy in the garden.
Complex Commerce
While already‐established B2C vendors such as Amazon and Alibaba are in a position to capitalize on the creation of consumer‐like experiences for B2B buyers and suppliers, supply chains would be better served by establishing their own integrated procurement workflows and sales platforms for maximum flexibility, visibility, and profitability. The appetite for fluidity that has driven consumer e‐commerce forward is equally coveted by businesses, who have billions of reasons to collaborate as quickly as possible with one another.
To some extent, existing innovations have helped to make that desire a reality. An 
increasing number of businesses are turning to B2B commerce networks that offer solutions to common problems for indirect spend management. The promise of these networks is automation, efficiency, and transparency to the Purchase‐to‐Pay (P2P) and Order‐to‐Cash (O2C) flows, helping to strip away some of the manual labour otherwise required. Recent years have also seen these services begin to transition to the cloud and offer mobile applications as another way of ensuring their businesses are as scalable as possible and better equipped to monitor data in real time.
4 Overall then, it should come as little surprise that 73% of enterprises5 believe 
B2B commerce networks enhance collaboration between buyers and suppliers.
This integration of available B2B commerce networks is certainly a step in the right 
direction for businesses eager to make the most of today’s technology, but there are still major obstacles in the quest to ensure the B2B customer journey reflects 
1 http://www.thepaypers.com/ecommerce/world‐ecommerce‐registers‐23‐6‐increase‐
in‐2013/757853‐25.
2 http://www.prnewswire.com/news‐releases/us‐b2b‐e‐commerce‐companies‐will‐generate‐1‐
trillion‐in‐sales‐in‐2014‐eclipsing‐b2c‐e‐retailing‐market‐four‐times‐over‐280776882.html.3 http://www.practicalecommerce.com/articles/85970‐B2B‐Ecommerce‐Growing‐Becoming‐
More‐Like‐B2C.
4 http://v1.aberdeen.com/launch/report/benchmark/8671‐RA‐accounts‐payable‐automation.asp.
5 Ardent Partners Annual State of Procurement Report.88
FinTech Solu TionS88the convenience of the B2C experience. Because at their cores, B2B and B2C 
commerce have fundamental differences.
For starters, for the B2B set, many more people are involved in purchase decisions 
on the buyer side, increasing the challenge for suppliers, as they engage in long sales and approval cycles. Then there is the diversity of possible purchase channels, which makes automation and reconciliation tricky as suppliers keep track of whether their latest sale was via an online portal, an email, telesales, or a firm handshake. Another obvious but key factor is the volume purchase of goods and significantly larger size of invoices in B2B commerce. These transactions are highly relationship‐dependent, and involve a degree of collaboration and coordination. In a B2C transaction, a customer is unlikely to make a distinction between buying directly from Amazon or a third‐party vendor with a storefront on the site. In B2B transactions, partnerships are precious and repeat business is vital for survival.
While B2B commerce networks cater for some of these complexities, the final link in 
the B2B chain – payments – remains hampered by a plethora of costly variables.
The Payment Problem
If a consumer wants to buy a single item online, they will find relatively fixed prices across multiple websites, place their order, and wait for their purchase to arrive. Concluding a B2B transaction is not so straightforward. Taxation regulations come into play, prices of goods may alter dramatically from one day to the next, or be subject to volume discounts, special offers, and more. Shipping adds further complexity too, due to the high numbers of varying products involved. There is also geography to consider, with the dispersion of supply chains introducing further issues around time zones, shipping distances, customs documentation, and cultural inconsistency in how businesses expect to do business.
And what about the potential for change after a payment has been made? More 
than 60%
6 of B2B transactions require manual intervention as new business 
conditions or events necessitate payments to be split, combined, rerouted, rescheduled, or altered for all manner of additional reasons. These changes create a nightmare for the remittance and reconciliation of a transaction. As a consequence, over 30% of invoices are paid late, by 30 days or more.
7One major issue here is data. When a buyer issues a batch payment for goods to multiple suppliers, it is almost impossible for a buyer to tell a supplier exactly what they are paying for or add any additional details within current systems. If their payment covers multiple invoices, for example, there is very limited space to say so. As one expert put it, the NACHA 94‐character format used by 97% of all electronic payments in the US allows for “about half of the information that a tweet gives”.
8 The Single European Payments Area (SEPA) format has the same 
challenge. Hardly adequate for the complex data required for describing a basic B2B transaction – let alone if some variable changes somewhere in the transaction lifecycle. This issue is exacerbated by cross‐border transactions where financial systems do not speak the same language and lose even more data in translation.
Such challenges make cash flow frustratingly unpredictable, and leave businesses 
playing a guessing game. Buyers want to optimize their working capital and better manage liquidity by introducing more visibility and control to their procurement process, but do not have accurate or up‐to‐date information to guide them – often missing out on supplier discounts in the process. Likewise, suppliers want to get paid predictably: on time, at the correct amount, and with the right data. Otherwise, they cannot predict cash flow and are often left in a difficult position as they attempt to raise capital to cover expenses. These issues are all too real for the vast majority of businesses – 78% of which say that they cannot forecast cash flow with accuracy.
9 
As long as enterprises are unable to collaborate and transact with partners across the world in real time, visibility and control of what is happening to their money is obscured, and supply chains remain woefully inefficient (see the following Figure).
6 Global Payments Report 2013, BCG.
7 Ibid.8 http://www.pymnts.com/in‐depth/2014/b2b‐payments‐are‐antiquated‐and‐starving‐for‐data/#.
VZWHJkY__R4.
9 Global Payments Report 2013, BCG.Figure:  Ironically, in today’s 24/7/365, uber‐connected era of business, 
most businesses still have little control or visibility of the status of 
their payment processes – and the consequences are staggering78%
OF COMP ANIES CAN’T
FORECAST SHORT -TERM
CASH FLOW WITHIN
5% ACCURACYOF CFOS REPORT ISSUES
CAUSED BY POOR
VISIBILITY AND CONTROL
OF SUPPLIER P AYMENTSOF P AYMENTS ARE
HANDLED MANUALL Y
CAUSING UP TO 25%
P AYMENT MISMA TCHESOF B2B INVOICES ARE
P AID AFTER THE DUE
P AYMENT PERIOD AGREED
(USUALL Y 30 DAYS)59% >60% >30%
FinTech Solu TionS89The finer details are painful to observe. Today, companies still manage 70% of 
all invoices via paper, and spend nearly $1 trillion10 in fees to intermediaries just 
to make payments – half of which must be handled manually.11 With the average 
cost of a single invoice estimated to be $14.21 in 2014, and many companies processing over 400,000 invoices each year,
12 the time and money involved in 
settling up is a massive waste of resources and capital. And while forward‐thinking Accounts Payable departments are gradually moving off this paper trail, they remain hampered by the dearth of solutions that have existed to make the transition to full payment automation as quick and seamless as they need it to be.
A Broken System
At the root of the payment problem lie the antiquated systems that most banks offer for B2B remittance. With few competitors, and therefore little to gain by changing, banks have continued to provide “solutions” that have not undergone much alteration since Edison first cracked the light bulb conundrum. Non‐standardized banking models across the globe, fragmented organizational structures that impair customer visibility, and poor collaboration between banks and financial institutions are just some of the drawbacks that render current banking services obsolete in our ever‐increasingly connected economy. Unquestionably, these vestigial banking platforms are a key factor in leaving AP departments drowning beneath an ocean of paper as they manage the huge numbers of B2B exception transactions, and a reason why business cannot replicate the convenience levels now normalized in B2C e‐commerce. Even existing B2B networks that claim to offer a payment component are in fact just sending a static payment “instruction file” to a bank or a link to a payment gateway. The result is exactly the same lack of transparency and loss of important data that occurs with the inflexible systems provided by banks.
This array of variables in B2B transactions underscores the fact that business 
conditions are too dynamic to be adequately served by such static payment methods. These methods include credit cards, wire transfers, and ACH transactions to name but a few, and any changes to the finer details of payments made in this way instantly cause B2B collaboration to become messy, time‐consuming, and costly.Thankfully, as with every persistent problem, a definitive solution can be found by taking a fresh approach.
Dynamic Payments
Today, FinTech innovators are out to create payment platforms that are every bit as dynamic as global business. Start‐ups are already partnering with leading enterprises to make the all‐important payment process a seamless part of their B2B commerce experience. Underpinning their work is the belief that B2B collaboration fit for the modern digital marketplace will be impossible until the final hurdle of static payments is removed.
The first step for those seeking to bring about a state of B2B nirvana has been to 
define exactly what constitutes a “dynamic” as opposed to a “static” payment. If payments within existing systems are sluggish, disconnected, and inefficient, it follows that any dynamic payments platform must allow for dramatically faster, safer, and smarter transactions.
In order to achieve that aim, these new players have created systems that allow 
businesses to execute, clear, and settle payments in real time, all the time. Key to these endeavours is a desire to marry the best of secure digital banking, rich electronic data interchange, and modern cloud‐based technologies that can handle structured and unstructured data of any size or format (see the following Figure). This merging and modification of existing services and technologies has long been the Holy Grail of B2B e‐commerce requirements, and the formula for event‐driven payments that are truly dynamic.
10 Source: The Hackett Group (as reported in the Purchase to Pay Manifesto from Basware).
11 http://downloads.tradeshift.com/Ardent%20Partners%20‐%20ePayables%202014%20‐%20
The%20Quest.pdf.
12 Top priorities for AP in 2014 – Ardent Partners. Figure:  Elements of a dynamic payments platformDYNAMIC PAYMENTS PLATFORM
CORE BANKING
SYSTEM
SAFE AND SECURE—
MEETS AND EXCEEDS
BANKING STANDARDSDYNAMIC PAYMENTS.
ADAPTS ON-THE-FL Y
TO THE BUSINESSSMART PAYMENTS.
RICH DATA—REAL-TIME,
TRACK AND TRACERICH DATA
ATTACHMENTSWORKFLOW
INTEGRATION90
FinTech Solu TionS90Such software solutions are empowering businesses to adapt to all the potential 
exceptions occurring in the aftermath of payments. B2B commerce networks offering dynamic payments capabilities are now able to get beyond the basic connection of purchase orders and electronic invoices, and truly offer an end‐to‐end closed‐loop system for their buyers and suppliers that incorporates a 360° view of the entire transaction – enabling a whole new level of connection, collaboration, and strategic transaction. Supply chain financing, factoring, dynamic discounting, cash auctioning, and more can now be part of the equation with the press of a button.
By utilizing event‐driven workflow engines that connect to existing B2B commerce 
systems across the supply chain, enterprises can finally trust in tech to monitor and dynamically react to any changes in the transaction, while keeping all of the details synchronized. Thanks to FinTech innovation, the payment process no longer needs to be an isolated, unpredictable step that undermines any prior efficiencies gained in the run‐up to settlement.
The net result for the first businesses to turn to these platforms has been greater 
ownership of their capital, liquidity, and cash flow, and the removal of one of the key barriers to them working in a way they have always instinctively felt should be possible. As more companies begin to realize that the most flawed component of B2B commerce is being addressed right now, they would be doing their bottom line a disservice by not adopting the solutions available.
Of course, this light bulb moment is just part of the larger story of collaborative 
innovation in B2C and B2B e‐commerce, and as FinTech’s modern‐day inventors continue to redefine and rewire the way things work in the world, there are no doubt many more sparks of inspiration still to come.
FinTech Solu TionS91Payments and Point of Sales 
(POS) Innovation
By Rube Huljev 
Former Sales Director, CardMobili
“Merchants have no country. The mere spot they stand on does not constitute so strong 
an attachment as that from which they draw their gains.”
Thomas Jefferson
It was 13 February 1601 when James Lancaster slowly raised the anchor of the Red 
Dragon, drifting out of Woolwich to begin a journey that he never thought would change the world forever. The first step in the globalization of trade had begun with only four modest ships. At the time, valiant men had understood what connects the world – it was the ocean. The ocean allowed for the flow of goods, trade, and information. The ocean was the first internet. Unevenly distributed goods were the opportunity that these original global entrepreneurs had sensed and had the courage to act upon. Their unfair advantage was their hard-to-find knowledge of the world, long-range navigation, and willingness to face the overwhelming odds where the ultimate price was one’s life. A group of London-based merchants that acted as their angel seed investors never dreamed of the outcome that would result from this initial experiment.
Today, over 400 years later, we are experiencing an almost identical moment, where 
the opportunities and the promise of riches abound and are even greater. The flow of spices and goods is not the big opportunity of today – the flow of data is. The internet, and more specifically the mobile internet, is the new ocean connecting different shores. The information, once a prized possession in the hands of a select few, is now at the fingertips of anyone who wants to use it and act upon it. The trouble today is that there is too much information coming from many different sources. Thus making sense of it all, correlating and putting it to a good use has become an art – not the information gathering process itself.
The merchant’s situation has changed too. Once those with the biggest warehouse 
commanded the markets, today it is those with no warehouse or stock at all. Physical store locations are threatened and are becoming a burden and a liability. Pure play digital merchants of goods and services are slowly creating a perception that it is the only way to go, and bricks-and-mortar enterprises could soon become extinct (or could they?). Many things have changed due to technology: from consumers getting used to ever more evolving convenience, to shorter delivery times, and lower margins and prices.
But one thing is constant and it is hard-wired from the trade of ancient times until 
today – human psychology. What consumers and customers really want is the experience. Whether it is exclusivity, craving something first and then bragging about it to their network, or the dopamine rush caused by the unpacking of a box whose arrival was expected. The surprise effect of receiving something unexpected. The overwhelming feeling of warmth when sending a gift to a friend. The experience of how something feels at the moment you buy (and pay for!) it. The  experience of a trade, goods and money exchanging hands, changing owners. There is something incredibly personal in any trade, which is becoming lost in these digital times. People do not buy goods, but instead they buy an experience, a ritual.
Emotion. That is what people give away their hard earned money for, the feel-good 
effect that follows or is part of the ritual of exchange. Do you go to restaurants to end your feeling of hunger? Yes, also. But what you’re really looking for is to feel good, to be served with a smile, to be recognized and pampered. To feel good and experience a great service, which also includes food.
Humans are wired for social interaction, which does not end in a digital world. The 
technology of today has allowed for a relationship of any type (merchant-to-person, brand-to-person, person-to-person) to start in the digital world, but the real, complete effect of that relationship is unleashed in the physical world, between two human beings. If one of them is a customer and the other is a merchant, so much the better.
And here we come to the main reason why pure play digital merchants are not a 
match for merchants that have both a physical and a digital presence. When the consumer walks into a bricks-and-mortar store, the opportunities to enhance and personalize the customer’s experience are exponential. When a sales assistant knows the correct information about the preferences of a customer, maybe even their name and the actual context of their visit, the customer feels personally served and treated. The customer feels like a king. No pure digital play can extract that smile and that kind of bonding between a brand and a consumer.92
FinTech Solu TionS92And this small unrecognized fact is a saviour of the smart banks. Real-time 
personalization of customer experience, based on the best, ubiquitous, and most frictionless touch-point available anywhere – a point-of-sale terminal. Can you imagine a better point for customer acquisition and evolution of the relationship? While the whole industry is reinventing new ways to pay and creating technologies and competing standards for payments, customers do not have a problem with payment. They insert their card and can walk away in under 10 seconds with the goods under their arm. But give them something more, incentivize the customer, surprise them, offer a better personalized experience, become more human – you as a merchant will reap the results, unexpected ones. Try it on a small scale and you will be preaching this yourself in no time.
As a bank, you hold the ownership of the single most important touch-point in 
a consumer–merchant relationship, with emphasis on the relationship – not a transaction. Evolve your business models to sell services which bring additional value to merchants (and in turn the “kings”, customers) on top of your transactions processing. Sell relationships, walk-ins, connect customers and businesses in a meaningful way. Help merchants construct a long-term value exchange with their customers, help brands construct an ad network out of their current convinced customers. Make the customers their digital word-of-mouth, a marketing channel every type of merchant has sworn by since the dawn of time. Help businesses get more smiles and referrals.
We live in very interesting times, where technology is changing everything it 
touches. This has been the case for quite some time, but since the mobile has taken centre stage, the “software eating the world” process has accelerated exponentially. Never before in the history of humankind has the effect of technology on everyday life been so profound or has its impact been visible so fast.
Why is that so? Because mobile is in the hands of every consumer, it is the most 
intimate and immediate device to reach and influence people, including the magic moment of purchase. And the consumer is, and will remain, the king (or queen, as the case may be). The more technology advances, the more it will become apparent that the real-time feedback of consumers to each other, even if they are strangers, has given them amazing power – a power feared by any type of merchant. Consumers decide the fate of merchants, who in turn decide the fate of banks.The Three Pillars of a Financial 
Transaction
Let us look at these three pillars of a financial transaction: the customer, the bank, 
and the merchants.
Customer
“Swiper, stop swiping.” A favourite quote from lovable Dora the Explorer, is also a looming curse for banks and merchants. Consumers decide where and when to swipe, touch, buy … and sometimes not to swipe at all. No swipe, no transaction fee, no merchant, no bank.
So we do agree that the customer is right at the top of the food chain.
Bank
Acquiring banks on the other hand have always been charging their merchants, 
which many have perceived as “tax” without any perceived value add. Therefore, given a chance, merchants will move to the nearest lower bidder. No added value, no loyalty, no country.
And there are many challengers, pretenders to the banking throne. Established 
banks face an onslaught of disruptors through blockchain technologies, less complicated processing, lower fees through cheaper technologies, cheaper distribution, lighter or no regulation – and finally no expensive physical and personnel overheads.
Luckily for banks, the challengers (still) compete on lower fees, prices, and no long-
term commitments. There will be no winner in the race to the bottom with fees per transaction – learn your lessons from the telecom world.
The real winners will differentiate themselves with services on top of transactions 
that are perceived to be valuable to both merchants and end consumers. Simple, effective B2B2C services that are activated easily and sold on top of the existing merchant processing and acquiring solutions. No sale needed. Fast and effective upselling.
FinTech Solu TionS93Merchants
And finally, the third part of the puzzle. Merchants. All of us involved in financial 
and tech services need to consider their simple needs and always present burning issues. Now, what is it that all merchants want?
Merchants want more profit. Merchants want new customers. Merchants want to 
spend less and lower their costs, especially on marketing that cannot be measured. But most importantly – merchants seek and want whatever their customers want and crave, whatever makes their customers happy and turns them into willing, sincere advocates. That something is the elusive smile. Once you have made them smile, you as a merchant, or provider of any kind of service, have done 50% of your work with your customer. You have established an emotional bond. Your customer has become more involved and tolerant. If merchants keep building on that smile, the benefits that come from that particular convinced customer (which are by the way fully measurable if the whole experience is designed well) will astound anyone. That customer experience, perceived through any touch-point, counts and differentiates more than ever before.
Building Blocks of the New Bank
With what we understand of the customer experience and touch-points, what can we say about the New Bank?
POS as the Preferred Touch-point
Banks and processors own the single most important touch-point in a relationship between a consumer and a business, which is also one of the most often forgotten. Make sure you sprinkle a bit of magic fairy dust on top of those devices in the form of services that simply acquire customer identity and can act and react to a customer’s current context, paired with the back-end services that power it. There is a whole range of emerging smart new-generation POS devices (like Poynt) that will be able to make use of these services and present them to the customer in a modern way at that magic moment of contact.
Data
There are many companies that know a whole lot about customer behaviour in the digital world. There are very few that can construct a customer context in the physical environment. Banks are one of those few.
B2B2C Automated Personalization SaaS1 for 
Merchants and Consumers
These services, preferably based on a performance business model, should become a core of the bank offering – a missing link that translates the obsolete into the indispensable.
Remember that centuries-old wisdom which still stands and always will in the world 
of commerce – the mere spot a merchant stands on (his bank and his taxman) does not constitute as strong an attachment as that from which they draw their gains (their customer’s wallet).
And finally we come to an underlying conclusion – he who holds the loyalty and 
allegiance of consumers will have the attention of merchants too. Banks – wake up, watch your backs, offer transaction-related services to bring in more customers to your merchants. This can become your real, fully measured added value.
Will banks need to transform into technology marketing agencies? Will business 
models move more towards performance? Most probably. Fast. For if the banks do not do it, Facebook, Google, Apple, Samsung, Paypal, Amazon, and other contenders are surely laying the rails, since they have sensed the opportunity. They are lean, fast, and can get around regulation more easily.
The new Golden Age of Sail has begun. Are you building lean and fast ships?
1 Software as a Service.94
FinTech Solu TionS94Predictive Algorithms – 
Building Innovative Online Banking Solutions
By Jan Michael Auer 
Co-Founder, predictR and 25th-floor
Jakob Etzel
Co-Founder, predictR and 25th‐floor 
Georg Heiler 
Co-Founder, predictR 
Martin Prebio
Co-Founder, predictR and 25th-floor 
Two observations motivate this chapter. Firstly, the financial crisis has shown 
a significant increase in the non‐performing loan ratio in retail banking. One of the roots of this development is the widespread weak financial literacy of retail customers. Secondly, digitalization of retail banking is thriving and has become a key success factor. Nevertheless, quick market research in German‐speaking countries shows that the evolution of online banking in the past five years has only taken place in the areas of design and user experience/interface. Thus, there is a rising need for new solutions that add improved functionality.
The idea is to bring these two observations together. Historical transaction data 
of retail customers can be converted into cash flow forecasts. This is tackling a real‐world pain: many customers find it difficult to make a long‐term forecast of their cash flows and to analyse scenarios in this context. Such scenarios can be life moments (e.g. getting promoted or losing a job) or the desire to reach a financial goal (e.g. how to fund a new car or flat). Retail customer data includes enough information to expand predictions to a sufficiently long‐term period. Thus, customers can explore their financial future in interactive graphs, and bank products can be presented in the context of life decisions.
Background
In 2015, many management conference panellists claim that successful companies need to install chief innovation officers either on their board, or directly subordinated, with the power to break through company silos and turn around stuck processes. More than ever before, innovation is the key driver for economic success and the pressure on executives to generate or acquire innovation is at a high level.
A sector that has long been looked at as performing very badly in the field of 
innovation is banking and insurance. FinTech companies that want to disrupt the current stalemate have very high stakes and tough regulations to follow. The macro‐economic environment allowed traditional products to provide enough profits, and competition happened basically on the basis of pricing and reputation, but was rarely based on innovation.
Banks and insurance companies have in the past offered both consulting services 
and products. Usually only the products were priced, whereas the consulting was traditionally seen as a free service. Today’s near‐zero interest rates and the increasing capitalization requirements of banks make these practices more challenging and it is immensely difficult to get the consumer on a pay‐for‐service track.
The aforementioned broader background forces banks to increasingly transform 
their business models and find or acquire new forms of revenue streams. Now we will take a closer look at the two main observations behind this chapter.
Financial literacy was long seen as a guarantor that retail customers would use the 
services and products of a bank, and would not rely on other funding opportunities (e.g. peer‐to‐peer lending). There has always been the basic assumption that bank relationship managers’ education, training, knowledge, and experience enable them to know and understand their clients’ needs and environment, find the right products, and subsequently be available at important moments in life. This could be interpreted as the retail customers being very short on alternatives other than to trust their bank advisor.
Today, however, customers can help themselves with various online forums and 
comparison websites. Often, clients enter bank branches with prepared print‐outs detailing how much they can get with the competition. Still financial illiteracy is one of the causes of non‐performing loans (NPL). A large number of bankruptcies of small and medium‐sized enterprises (SME) are caused by poor financial literacy. As we see in the annual reports of all major banks, the unstable currency exchange rates and challenging economy make NPL ratios increase in virtually all markets.
FinTech Solu TionS951 “Anpassen statt Aussterben”, article in the newspaper DiePresse, supplement “Magazin 4.0”, 
27 June 2015, p. 28, Vienna.
2 Source: World Bank, 2007.
3 Source: usage‐statista.com, 2014.Example  Online Banking in Austria
Austria is relatively well‐developed when it comes to banking, and online banking 
statistics are similar to most Central and Western European markets. As an example, Austria’s largest bank, the Raiffeisen Banking Group, has 1.6 million online banking customers. Out of 700,000–800,000 daily contacts, the bank is already handling 25 percent of them originating from mobile devices.
1
In the European Union, out of 507 million citizens, 85% are bank customers,2 
of whom 44% use online banking.3 According to author interviews with bank 
representatives, approximately 10% of online banking users are “power users” who regularly use advanced features and act as early adopters. Taking these early adopters as a target group of online banking innovation, there is a 20 million target group in the 28 EU Member States.
The Austrian market leader in online banking innovation at the moment is ERSTE 
Group who recently launched their new online banking service “George”, and combine the largest bandwidth of functionality. Additionally, banks are experimenting with multi‐channel strategies, such as account opening via email and phone or financial advice via video‐conferencing (see Table below).
Bank
Online account 
opening
Target saving
Rounding 
saving
Automatic 
categorization
Manual 
categorization
Personal 
finance 
managerCommunication channels with bank advisor additional to mail & phone Additional features
Raiffeisen X X 1 Branches Cash flow forecast for the next month
Bank Austria (UniCredit) X 2 Branches, online (video call) Cashback
Rest Bank X X X X X 3 Branches BlueCode transactions, plugin shop
Overbank Branches
Volksbank (x) Branches
EasyBank Mail/phone only
Santander (x) Mail/phone only
ING DiBa X 4 Mail/phone only
Deniz Bank (x) Mail/phone only
Holvi X X 4 Mail/phone only Online shop, invoicing, expense claims
Number 26 X X X 4 Mail/phone only
(1) Aggregation, allocation overview and historic cash flows; external products can be added manually
(2) Aggregation only(3) Visualization of the past and monthly statistics (“Snapshot”)(4) Only visualization of historic cash flowsTable:  Online banking features96
FinTech Solu TionS96Private Customer Cash Flow 
Forecasts
Against this background, the idea is now to generate cash flow forecasts for 
private customers’ current accounts. The forecasts will be made by predictive algorithms and will be based on the historical transaction data available at the bank. The prediction is done without any user interaction and is part of the customers’ online banking profile. The forecasts are planned to be delivered as “software as a service” and to be implemented as a white‐label solution (a product or service produced by one company (the producer) and rebranded by other companies (the marketers)).
Transaction clustering is at the core of such forecasting. Each cluster can be 
modelled differently and all cluster models together can thereafter be combined to aggregate estimates. Clusters can be chosen based on various parameters, for example:
•	Counterpart
•	Sign (income or expense)
•	Category (salary, rental, food, education, leisure, etc.)
•	Type (POS, credit card, standing order, etc.)
•	Geolocation.
Time series clustering (shown in the following Figure) can also be based on 
dissimilarity measures,
4 but transaction data usually have enough inherent structure 
to fit the above‐mentioned parameters.
The standard model generates median and 0.05/0.25/0.75/0.95 quantiles. 
Generally, the clusters acting as samples will be too small to give good quantiles and therefore a continuous sample is assumed and quantile interpolation is used. Other models are based on means instead of medians and/or calculate weighted estimates where stronger emphasis is put on more recent data.There is a multitude of different techniques that can be applied to time series, among them:
•	ATM withdrawal simulation by Hidden Markov models
•	Hierarchical time series (e.g. with nested transaction categories forming the 
hierarchy)
•	Copulae to simulate the influence of an event on multiple clusters and the clusters’ interdependencies.
In 2010 SAP presented their product HANA, which is a high‐performance in‐memory relational database management system. The HANA platform is shipped with predictive processing tools with numerous algorithms and R integration. It might be an interesting alternative to building up a system from scratch.
5 Oracle 
offers similar platforms and solutions, for example column‐based forecasts and automated data mining concepts.
6
Research and Testing
Tests are currently performed on two different real‐life data sets. The first includes 3,741 transactions encompassing seven years of a single current account and the second 434, derived from a three‐year current account history. Within the data sets it is possible to take a subsequence spanning two years as input and compare results with existing data (see the following Figure).
4 Georg Heiler. Clustering von Zeitreihen. Ein Uberblick über Anwendungen von Zeitreihen‐
Clustering . Bachelor’s thesis, Vienna University of Technology, 2015.5 http://www.sap.com/predictive.
6 http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/options/advanced‐analytics/odm/index.html.Figure:  Time series clusteringforall clusters by counterpart do
if length of cluster < 2 then
add cluster to rest cluster;
else
decide on model;
calculate daily cluster estimates;
process rest cluster with ARIMA model;
calculate daily rest cluster estimates;aggregate all estimates;
FinTech Solu TionS97The predictive algorithms were tested on seven years of historical transaction 
data. Stepwise two years of input were processed and the resulting 6‐month forecasts compared with the real data. The results shown above come from standard model calculations (order statistics). Results show that forecasts overestimate a negative or positive trend. This could be further corrected by using weighted estimates. When weighted estimates are used, the difference between back‐testing results and real data can be used to run an optimization algorithm on the weights used. Thus, the weights can set an optimal for every specific user, but bear the risk of recent data being considered as much more dominant than older data.
Thoughts on Business  
and Integration
The integration into online banking can be manifold, as the pricing structure in the 
following Figure shows. Cash flow forecasting can, for example, be a source for an intelligent semantic search engine. It can also be part of the back‐end of product calculators and so‐called private finance managers (PFM).Figure:  Backtesting 
Source: predictR, Vienna
Figure:  Integration examples 
Source: predictR, Vienna
Table:  Pricing structures
Strategy User pays for Vendor delivers Target
Free for all Free API + graphics Get new 
customers
3rd party plug‐in Yearly 
subscriptionAPI + graphics Get customers to 
pay for service
Freemium Premium feature API + graphics Get customers to 
pay for service
Integrationinto PFMYearly subscriptionAPI Enhancing PFM with prediction
7 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
The pricing structure shown in the Table above7 can follow usual software‐as‐a‐
service models:
•	An up‐front fee is paid for the installation of the system. Due to data protection 
requirements there will be the need to deploy in a high‐security data centre or directly at bank premises. There is also a need for high customization.98
FinTech Solu TionS98•	A monthly or quarterly provisioning fee can be set quite low and ensures basic 
service level agreements and infrastructure costs. If the contract allows for automatic feature upgrades, this fee might have to be set higher.
•	Finally, transaction pricing counts all requests targeted to the prediction server and bills constantly, e.g. every thousand requests.
Applying Predictive Analytics  
to SMEs
According to many interviews with SME executives, tax accountants, and 
bank managers/customer relationship managers, there is a need to provide SMEs with adequate predictive analytics. On the one hand, this helps to make better decisions per se. Secondly, this can also help in the battle against financial illiteracy and give owners and managers a better visualization and understanding of dependencies and complexity, and also allow intuitive scenario planning.
The following figures could be interesting to predict:•	Cash flows
•	The impact of volatile currency exchange rates
•	Demand of special products, e.g. the number of revolving credit lines, derivative 
instruments/hedges for specific products or currencies.
Providing powerful interfaces can enable the prediction platform to interact with a range of external data sources:
•	Macroeconomic data. System users can be asked to give additional data such 
as geolocation, size (revenue, employees), sector, typical location, and sector of vendors and customers. This master data can form the basis for feeding appropriate external macroeconomic data into the forecasts.
•	CRM/ERP/accounting/data warehouse systems. Depending on the size and sector of a company, there might be one of these systems in place. Their data can be used directly as raw input for the predictive algorithms or – being aggregated or the result of a prediction – form a factor in scenario planning.
•	Additional banks. Once a company reaches a certain size, the likelihood is high that there are also connections to other banks. For instance, there could be a leasing contract or mortgage loan at another financial institution. There might even be syndicated loans or larger facilities. Industry standards and FinTechs like FIGO offer to connect these banks and retrieve their (transaction) data – possibly even in real time.
The disruptiveness of such methods can be quite wide‐ranging. It directly impacts consultants, tax accountants, and in‐house employees. For banks, having such data available could change the pricing of funding instruments and eventually even risk pricing.
Conclusions
Predictive algorithms are a highly promising and interesting field of research. Additionally, there are already the first low‐hanging fruits to be harvested: solid business models can be built around them, as shown by the example of private customer cash flows.
The buzzword “treasury as a service” summarizes a couple of interesting leads 
towards further implementation. In particular, the use of predictive algorithms in combination with online banking and the banks’ data – maybe even in combination with external sources – is promising. Ultimately, this can bring new functionalities in the customer segment of micro‐corporates.
However, there are still some obstacles to overcome. Powerful statistical methods 
may deploy untested results and methodologically incorrect models. Also, bank back‐ends might not yet be able to provide the necessary data in the requested time or data quality might simply be too poor. And in the end, there is still the risk of the users not being interested in the algorithms’ output or being unable to deal with it.
A successful roll‐out of private customer cash flow forecasts will be the first milestone 
on the journey to make predictive algorithms available to every bank customer.
FinTech Solu TionS99Big Data is the Cornerstone 
of Regulatory Compliance Systems
By Thierry Duchamp 
Founder & COO, Scaled Risk
Many financial institutions have been adapting their existing information systems 
in order to comply with post‐crisis regulations. Unfortunately, the limits of their legacy technologies have been shown to be dramatic, and they have failed to meet regulators’ expectations that the massive volume of data held by the banks, spanning several years, is now to be available quickly, if not in real time.
This chapter shows how big data technologies can make risk and compliance 
information systems easier to implement. It also describes how the technology turns constraints into business opportunities. If banks are viewed in this context as gigantic data factories, then big data technology offers the opportunity to link up previously separate functions and operating models. A single big data system can now provide an all‐in‐one transactional, business intelligence, and compliance solution.
As big data technology has progressively evolved from its beginnings in the web 
sector, it has been adapted to support the unique requirements and challenges of the financial industry. This chapter describes the architecture and the features of Scaled Risk, a financial software company, as a software solution, and explains why these components are prerequisites for the implementation of big data technologies in a financial context. We also present a small set of real‐world examples of how big data can be used for compliance and risk management purposes.
In Banks, Big Data Implementation 
Has Been too Slow
Since the early 2010s, the term “big data” has been commonly used to describe 
a new generation of technologies and new approaches for data management. This technology has been created by major players of the web industry because traditional technologies were not able to adapt to an unpredictable number of users, fast‐growing data volumes, and the increasing needs for processing capabilities. The web industry was also expecting a greater level of flexibility and agility, so application look and feel could evolve rapidly without system interruption. “Big data” innovation pushed the web industry’s information system capabilities to their greatest flexibility, ease of use, and power.
Surprisingly, enterprises, banks included, have mostly missed this train, with 
obvious implications. Enterprise innovation has evolved at a very slow pace, compared to the internet. In the end, everyday tools show high flexibility and user‐friendliness, while business tools suffer from rigidity and slow learning processes.
Could “Internet Big Data” Have 
Been Directly Applied to Banks?
Unfortunately, direct application is not straightforward; nevertheless a huge part of 
the software industry is participating in the enterprisation of big data technologies. This enterprisation is progressively providing business software applications with the same level of flexibility and ergonomics that already exists on the internet. This began in the early 2010s with the noticeable success of Salesforce.com, but progress is slow and is taking more time than anyone predicted due to the following factors:
•	Big data architecture is a drastic change of paradigm—implementation requires 
new knowledge, if not new people.
•	The internet use cases mostly differ from enterprise use cases.
•	The level of confidence in technology used by the internet world is (often wrongly) lower than for the other industries, especially the banking industry.
Most banks have implemented big data technologies with variable results, mainly depending on the use case for which the technology is required. The closest to the internet world, and the easiest to implement, are:
•	Marketing
•	Know Your Customer (KYC)
•	Fraud detection.100
FinTech Solu TionS100Compliance systems need both data consistency and real‐time accuracy to cope 
with the latest regulation requirements. Legacy technologies have been able to manage data consistently and in real time for the last 30 years – unfortunately with drastic limits. Big data technologies do not provide off‐the‐shelf, real‐time data consistency, which is an issue.
How Can Real‐time and Consistent 
Data be Obtained from Big Data Technology?
Combining real‐time and data consistency for big data is an engineering challenge 
that is solved with Scaled Risk technologies. Big data technologies, as a proposition for a new architecture, rely on distributed computing, with a full lockless approach (i.e. no distributed consensus allowed). A lockless paradigm is the price to pay for getting almost unlimited system scalability, which means:
•	Unlimited storage
•	Unlimited processing capabilities
•	Unlimited caching capabilities.
Time synchronization across the cluster is the secret to providing full lockless data 
consistency in time. This approach, largely inspired by Google’s Spanner (http://research.google.com/archive/spanner.html), provides consistency as of any date, starting at 1 second in the past from now. This delay can even be reduced by using specific time synchronization hardware.
Standard real‐time big data also needs to be enhanced, as it has different 
meanings in the internet world and in the banking industry. Where “interactive” is a good synonym for the former, “event‐driven” and “notification‐capable” are what the latter expects. Scaled Risk technologies embed both latest innovations from big data and the old recipes that have been used since the early 90s for real‐time financial data feed.Big Data Technology is the 
Best Technology to Implement Compliance Systems
By definition, compliance systems need data collection, from both internal and 
external systems:
•	Trading systems
•	Market data
•	Referential and CRM
•	External financial data
•	Real‐time and historical news
•	Government data (OFAC, FACTA, EMIR, Dodd‐Frank)
•	And many others.
Data needed by compliance systems is not only getting bigger and bigger, but also 
becoming more and more complex. In a nutshell, big data technologies solve two major drawbacks of legacy technologies: the lack of both flexibility and of elasticity and scalability.
Lack of Flexibility
Thanks to elasticity and scalability, infrastructure can be adapted on the fly.
Flexibility
Information systems must be able to cope with rapid changes due to regulation and business pressures. The agility required is very difficult to implement with relational database management systems (RDBMs), even for a single silo in the bank. Compliance systems, by nature, centralize multiple information streams from various standards and formats. Handling the necessary, but numerous, changes in the source systems is an impossible mission with RDBMs and Extract, Transform and Load (ETL)‐based solutions.
FinTech Solu TionS101Big data technologies propose a disruptive approach regarding data schema 
management, because data and related data structures are stored and managed separately. The primary approach used by big data technologies relies on data schemas on read, which means data is stored in a format managed by the application. This approach gives greater flexibility, as data schemas can be changed with more ease. But there is a drawback with this approach as it offers poor visibility on data: everything is hidden by the code.
As early as 2012, Scaled Risk introduced a hybrid approach using the “Schema on 
read” approach, enhanced by:
•	A data schema implemented on top of a meta‐model;
•	“Schema on read” able to smartly rely on several versions of this data schema;
•	“Schema on read” also able to automatically trigger types conversions.
This hybrid approach drastically reduced the usual costs for implementing a 
centralized data warehouse, at the initialization stage, but also for later upgrades.
Elasticity and Scalability
Elasticity and scalability are the main disruptions brought about by big data technologies. Enabling a real lockless distributed architecture allows a big data application to offer limitless:
•	Data storage
•	Processing capabilities
•	Caching (in‐memory).
Implementing a regulatory system brings a lot of uncertainty, very similar to what 
happened to the web industry:
•	To what degree of complexity will data evolve?
•	How fast will data grow?
•	Will it need more processing power (e.g. valuation)?
•	Will it need to be quicker (e.g. Dodd‐Frank and Clearing House)?Combining Internal and External Data
An efficient compliance system must be able to combine data that the 
bank already stores in its internal systems, data provided by third parties, and public data (i.e. social networks, web). To illustrate, these are the data sources needed for detecting money laundering through company acquisitions:
•	Data from banks’ transactions systems
•	Data from external company directories to verify the shareholders
•	OFAC and similar lists
•	Web search results about stakeholders.
Big data not only enables easy data collection and storage, but also provides 
various ways to reconcile data from different formats in a flexible (i.e. fuzzy) way. In the case of money laundering detection, this implementation will:
•	Detect that shareholders are the same people as those mentioned in web search 
results or OFAC lists, even if names are transliterated differently from various languages;
•	Compute a reputation score by text‐mining the web;
•	Use machine learning for weak signal detection or fraud pattern detection on account transactions.
By combining this information, a big data approach (as shown in the following Figure) will give an instant result on money laundering probability. Similar manual verification requires several hours of work and is not as exhaustive or as efficient.
Enhance Traditional Approaches
Big data is able to reduce data complexity and to detect weak signals in huge sets of information. Statistics, text‐mining, and machine learning leverage the distributed capabilities of big data systems, as they can:
•	Store huge amounts of data and unlimited history depth;
•	Execute complex algorithms in real time;102
FinTech Solu TionS102•	Keep most used data in a fast‐distributed cache (i.e. in‐memory);
•	Keep costs very reasonable (mid‐range servers are used).
These approaches give excellent results for extracting hidden information in 
masses of data, with the drawback of producing false positive results.
On the other hand, traditional approaches are too rigid and restrictive and often 
miss real positive results. Another drawback of legacy approaches, with business rules engines based on structured data, is the difficulty of adapting to regulation changes.
The hybrid approach of feeding a rules engine with indicators provided by a big data 
system provides better results. Big data indicators with false positives are filtered out very efficiently by the rules engines, while more cases are detected. Regulation pressure has definitely gone beyond “time and material”. Being unable to implement efficient compliance control has already resulted in multibillion‐dollar fines.
Audit Everything
Controlling and implementing regulatory control is unfortunately not sufficient. Regulation requires being able to produce evidence of having actually triggered all controls. Big data is again extremely helpful in exhaustively storing results, timestamps, and related information into a single audit trail.
The audit trail is always available, which means that several years can be kept 
online. Archiving becomes easier as storage capability is unlimited: fine‐grained with unlimited history depth.Figure:  Big data approach to combining internal and external data 
Source: Scaled Risk
FinTech Solu TionS103Successful Project Implementation
Based on our experience, the successful implementation of a big data compliance 
system needs a set of prerequisites and best practices.
Intermediate Components are Needed
Hadoop, an open‐source software framework, as a raw technology, is not self‐sufficient to implement the usual financial use cases. An internal project based on Hadoop will need several man‐months if not man‐years just to build and integrate a set of intermediate technical components. This is certainly the most surprising fact one encounters when starting a big data project from scratch.
Another lesson learned: components that are publicly available do not necessarily 
cope with banking system requirements, especially in relation to data consistency and real time. This means that some components also have to be built.Building an internal project requires a huge amount of time that can be saved by the use of an existing third‐party platform, as can be seen in the following Figure.
Scaled Risk offers off‐the‐shelf financial big data capabilities, which means two 
years of time to market with our integrated platform:
•	A flexible multi‐version data schema for fast data collection.
•	Real‐time event‐driven technology at the heart of the architecture.
•	Instant, easy, and consistent data access thanks to search engine functionality.
•	Consistent reporting capabilities thanks to distributed and real‐time online 
analytical processing (OLAP).
•	Full audit view with as of data view capabilities.
•	Data visualization components.
Figure:  Hadoop framework 
Source: Scaled Risk
104
FinTech Solu TionS104Using such a solution is likely to allow you to spend extra time and money on 
actually implementing compliance rules and controls.
Use an Open System
This is completely compatible with off‐the‐shelf commercial solutions. Scaled Risk does not capture your data into a black box. Hadoop and the Open Source ecosystem provide big companies with a powerful piece of software (R, Spark, Hive, etc.) that remains entirely compatible with this system.
An open system is also about being able to extend or modify rules and data source. 
The technologies used to do this must be standard and open so you can easily find expert resources on the job market.End‐to‐end Project Implementation
Big data technologies are still new to enterprises and banks, with the result that the focus is too often on the technology itself. In our opinion, this is a mistake that absolutely must be avoided. The financial software industry is changing rapidly with several newcomers that are able to deliver financial and big data services at the same time. They are the best providers to deliver the compliance system of a new generation.
FinTech Solu TionS105FinTech Solutions in Complex 
Contracts Optimization
By Akber Datoo 
Partner, D2 Legal Technology LLP
Decades of neglect are coming home to roost. In an increasingly regulated and 
competitive world, it is incumbent on financial institutions to fully understand the complex contracts in place with their clients. Failure to do so risks catastrophe as witnessed by the fates of Lehman Brothers and AIG. If the financial crisis taught us anything, it was that there was an extremely poor understanding of the swathes of contracts entered into. Firms were caught in a whirlwind of panic, unable to find documents, let alone identify what crucial information they contained.
Regulators globally were shocked by this state of affairs. They imposed multiple 
requirements on financial firms to have better management of their legal contract data. For example, on 6 March 2015, the European Banking Authority (EBA) published a consultation paper containing a draft regulatory standard on the minimum set of information on financial contracts that should be contained in detailed records maintained by financial firms, tying this in to requirements under the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (colloquially known as the “living wills” requirement for systemically important financial institutions).
Certainly, these regulatory demands are not unreasonable – the legal contracts are 
an embodiment of how financial instruments manifest themselves, through the various terms, conditions, and contractual obligations undertaken by each of the parties to the financial contracts. The stability and smooth running of the financial system relies on the satisfactory management of these contractual terms. However, the reality over the last three decades has been that many legal and documentation teams have failed to keep up with the rapidly growing business lines that they support. Ironically, this is in stark contrast to these business lines that have wholeheartedly embraced technological innovation to scale, while the legal and documentation teams have not taken the opportunity to empower themselves in a similar manner with tools, systems, and utilities available to help them manage growth.
It is a sad reflection of the current state of the financial industry, that the stick of 
regulation is very much trumping the significant carrot of business optimization. The stick, however, is particularly large and forceful at the moment, manifesting itself in very heavy fines and sanctions imposed on institutions, many of which stem from a failure to track and manage contractual obligations, and as a result of an arrogant “too big to fail” mind‐set. Nonetheless, the stick has proved effective in forcing the use of FinTech to assist the rectification of this state of affairs by the creation of systems and processes to store and manage legal documentation and data. This is a task that would have been far less complex and time‐consuming had the correct processes been in place from the start, i.e. if the documentation teams had filed and stored the contracts, and kept track of key terms negotiated in their contracts. Fixing it after a number of decades of neglect has, however, entailed a different approach due to the sheer volume of legacy contracts of relevance. This is exactly where today’s technology comes into its own.
The big data excitement is all about seeing and understanding the relations within 
unstructured and structured data that until recently, we have struggled to grasp. Big data operates through comprehensive datasets and messiness, rather than small data and accuracy. One could argue that the challenge is not even big enough to really be a big data one, but it certainly is big enough to force legal teams to become more comfortable with disorder and uncertainty, taking on the role of a data scientist to find associations in the data, and acting on that, rather than a precise trawl through each and every word of every contract.
The initial challenge lies in simply ensuring that technology can be used to assist. 
Hard copy documents bound and kept safe in a vault are always going to require manual effort to obtain and read through. The legal contracts are therefore now being digitized and stored in electronic form by financial firms, using optical character recognition (OCR) and other related technologies, such as ICR (intelligent character recognition) and IWR (intelligent word recognition), to deal with some of the issues with handwritten rather than typed text. This is even being applied to areas such as the oral contracts between traders, with the use of speech recognition software to identify key terms of the verbally agreed contract and ensuring these match the trade confirmations generated by financial firms thereafter in order to avoid trade disputes.
The digitization phase is not without its challenges, such as the use of poorly 
defined tables in the documents. It is, however, greatly simplified through the legal documentation being drafted with reliance on precedent documents and tightly defined contract vocabulary.106
FinTech Solu TionS106Even the application of some basic classification algorithms to the electronic 
documents helps tremendously. The documents are now, post‐digitization, searchable, and the legal department is already empowered through the ability to find the documents required, a task that was difficult for no reason other than the poor classification and filing of the documents at the time of their execution. Furthermore, through some basic management of identifiers and mapping to other data sources such as risk and client static data systems, the size of the problem can be sensibly reduced to a far more manageable one, by linking the documents to the underlying trade exposures applicable to them, and focusing on where the risks truly lie.
Finding the contracts is only the beginning of the battle. Whilst the lawyer may still 
be sceptical of the idea of a Google‐style search delivering value on par with years of training and expertise, there is perhaps a parallel to be drawn with moments such as the success of Deep Blue, the chess‐playing computer developed by IBM – the first piece of artificial intelligence to win both a chess game and a chess match against a reigning world champion under regular time controls, and more recently, IBM Watson, when it competed with and beat at Jeopardy! former winners Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings.
The automation of tasks and processes in a very procedural “if A, then B” statement 
is the old model of computing, in which each and every step and scenario is determined in advance by the programmer, offering little help in automating the task of reading the legal contract, understanding its nuances, and deriving key data and intelligence from it.
The FinTech approach is the application of the new model of computing, applying 
interpretative capabilities that learn from the data and human guidance, adapting over time as new knowledge is gained.
A number of techniques are used to excellent effect:Correlation: at its core, this quantifies statistical relationships between data values. 
This allows a key legal contract data requirement to be met, not by understanding the intricate workings of it, but simply by identifying a useful proxy for it, including ones that are both multi‐dimensional and nonlinear. There is no need to identify the exact nuances of the client asset and money provisions, as they are applied in the contract, through the client terms and conditions, a complicated documentation stack, and general application of a plethora of overriding rules and regulation. Of course, even strong correlations are never perfect, and one may simply be fooled by randomness. However, that is the increasingly important guiding role of the lawyer – to avoid such issues. What the correlations do is drive the user to the high priority, high‐risk areas within the legacy documentation portfolio.
Validation: data values cannot be viewed in isolation. A legal contract and 
underlying law and regulation impose natural constraints on the data. By mapping these out and applying them, not only is it possible to refine the search and data extraction process, but this can also highlight some of the areas of very high concern. These are ones that a human review is far less likely to detect due to the laborious and repetitive nature of the check, such as ensuring that each party has an appropriate threshold defined in the document (rather than, as seen in a number of documents, the threshold being repeated twice to the same party in error through a simple copy and paste of the language by the drafter, forgetting to then amend the important contractual party reference).
Positive feedback: increasingly, through the use of text analytics and data extraction 
techniques, more granular and detailed structured legal contract data can be made available to downstream consumers. There is therefore greater visibility of the nuances of the contractual obligations contained within the legal contracts. Through use of this data, in areas such as collateral optimization and credit/funding valuation adjustments (CVA/FVA), any inaccuracies in the data are immediately noticed and can be corrected through the use of workflow.
The positive feedback to cleanse the accuracy of the legal data also forces the 
legal team to consider the legaleze through the lens of data. Ultimately, barring a dispute with a counterparty, this is the impact of the legal documents the financial firms have entered into. Of itself, this is transforming the real understanding of the financial instruments.
The infrastructure also allows not only better understanding of the current position 
and risk exposure of an institution through understanding the specific contractual terms applicable across one’s document portfolio, but it also allows continual optimization and improvement.
The application of FinTech need not end with the analysis and control over the 
legacy document portfolio. Rather, institutions are now looking at the current 
FinTech Solu TionS107process of putting the documentation in place, using document generation and 
assembly tools to drive standardization in cases where bespoke and varied language does nothing other than to complicate the regulatory and compliance requirements applicable. It also allows, through workflow and what‐if analysis of terms at the point of negotiations with clients, to really understand the risk and financial impact, enabling true optimization along the way.The FinTech journey is set to transform the role of the lawyer, empowering and placing them in a position of truly advising and being part of the business, removing the more administrative parts of the role, and replacing them with genuine advisory decision‐making.
108
FinTech Solu TionS108Behavioural Biometrics – A 
New Era of Security
By Neil Costigan 
CEO, BehavioSec
The world around us is changing – in our business and personal lives alike, we are 
mobile, connected, and regularly interacting with people from all around the globe. We have a range of electronic devices in our pockets, on our desks, and in our homes that mean we think nothing of grabbing whichever is closest to hand to send funds from one country to another, purchase items online from people we have never met, and manage our personal finances. It has to be fast, it has to be now, and it has to be convenient.
A lock and key is no good for protecting digital assets, and we are regularly 
asked to put our trust in people and systems without being able to see them face to face to verify their identity. This plethora of online information and interaction has introduced enormous opportunity for malicious hackers, seeking to highjack identities and misappropriate credentials. A recent report from fraud prevention agency Cifas shows this trend in action, reporting that the number of victims of identity theft rose by 31% to 32,058 in the first three months of 2015, compared to the same period in 2014.
1
The highly regulated financial services sector – home to vast flows of sensitive financial and cardholder information every second of the day – is under particularly close scrutiny against this new threat landscape. Not only that, but banks are battling an extraordinary pace of change and innovation driven by technological advances, regulatory requirements, and customer expectations. The explosion in mobile device ownership and the subsequent introduction of mobile payments is just one example of where retail banks are being forced to adopt a never‐before‐seen level of agility to react to – and secure – new channels and business models.A Complex Balancing Act
As banks seek to balance the all‐important triangle of privacy, convenience, and security, they are having to change the way they think about security. Since virtually every authentication technique can be compromised, they can no longer rely solely on any single control for authorizing high‐risk activity.
You do not have to look too far back in the news headlines to see evidence of a 
move towards a layered approach to security – combining the various available authentication technologies to improve both accuracy of fraud detection and user experience. Supplementary technology devices, such as card readers for verification, have been widely implemented as a means to strengthen the verification process with two‐factor authentication. However, these provide a pain point for customers – another piece of hardware to carry around, and an additional barrier to entry to access the service.
Biometrics has stepped in as a potential solution to this problem. From a technology 
perspective, the process of verifying people by their physical characteristics has been in development ever since the emergence of computer systems in the latter half of the 20th century. Of course, the concept of “biometrics” extends much further back – people have identified each other this way since the beginning of time. Nonetheless, biometrics as a technology concept has only recently been brought into the consumer conscience, thanks in part to giants such as Apple embracing fingerprint scans to log into devices.
Behavioural Biometrics
Behavioural biometrics is a lesser‐known technology, often overlooked in the headlines, that moves beyond static biometrics focused on our physical attributes (such as a fingerprint or iris scan), to rather focus on user behaviour. This takes into account details such as the way in which a person interacts with a device, the force with which they hit a key, the angle they use to swipe a touchscreen, or 
1 CIFAS, “Identity fraud up by 27% in first quarter of 2015”, https://www.cifas.org.uk/id_fraud_
first_quarter.
FinTech Solu TionS109their typing rhythm. The technology sits in the background of an app or device, 
and is completely transparent to the user, aligning to the desire for a streamlined, frictionless authentication experience.
Machine learning algorithms build up a unique picture of the user – not what they 
are doing, but how they are doing it – to allow for identification of anomalies that may indicate fraud, based on previous user behaviour patterns. Importantly, this verification process is continuous, throughout the course of the session, to ensure that the user is who they say they are during the entire interaction with the device, rather than just at point of entry.
Behavioural biometrics is ideally suited to mobile, thanks to the continuous flow of 
rich data we are able to collect through numerous sensors on smartphones, which is not available with traditional web use. With smartphones in mind, the technology is a great fit for authenticating mobile payments.
Security and Usability
Behavioural biometrics helps to make authentication part of the end‐to‐end experience – that is, a natural by‐product of whatever it is the user is trying to achieve, rather than calling it out as a specific step. Users will embrace stronger authentication if it is not difficult to use and – particularly on a mobile device – does not involve swapping in and out of apps on the move to locate one‐time access codes.
The trend towards mobile banking means that the time taken up by security 
requirements at the start of each session is particularly pertinent. People log into their bank accounts increasingly frequently, for a quick balance check, or to make a payment. Service providers cannot afford for 30 seconds of a 60‐second transaction to be taken up with authentication. Users will get bored, and will move on. Online retailers are battling a similar user trait, facing an increasing number of abandoned shopping carts which is damaging their revenue, and their reputation. While there are a host of reasons internet shoppers might abandon their basket, a clunky or long‐winded checkout process, or user inability to remember their security password, are often cited as the top causes.It is this “one‐click buy” universe, pioneered by major internet retailers such as Amazon and Apple, which is contributing to driving greater customer expectations when it comes to banking. If we receive one type of experience in one area of our online lives, we quickly come to expect it in another. There will be an even more direct link between these experiences now that we are seeing an increasing blurring of the lines as to what constitutes a bank or payment provider, with innovators such as Apple, PayPal, and Google now competing in this space. These companies, which excel at exceptional user experience and have built their brands on this strength, are now forcing the banks to become more customer‐centric and deliver the frictionless user experience that their customers demand.
Pragmatism and Perception
The conversation about usability rightly comes back to the need for pragmatic security. Users should be faced with security barriers that are appropriate to the level of risk inherent in whatever it is they are trying to do. No‐one should be faced with Fort Knox level security when a bicycle lock would be more appropriate. This takes another turn when we consider that social media providers such as Facebook have their sights set on the payment space. Facebook users likely do not have a particularly strong password to log in – for uploading holiday photos and posting new status updates, they do not need to. However, with social identities increasingly being used as entry points for other services – the “login with Facebook” option – we will need to ensure that people are directed down a stronger authentication path, once there is higher risk involved.
Another interesting factor to bear in mind is the importance of user perception 
of security. Although service providers generally strive for a seamless user experience, there are some instances in which it is useful to interrupt the consumer. We might not be happy with barriers to access some services, but we are reassured psychologically that the system is secure. And so the struggle to keep up with consumer demands continues. We are complex characters and sometimes our demands conflict with one another. It is up to security experts to understand this and navigate the intricate balance between security and usability, depending on the context of the process.110
FinTech Solu TionS110Security alone is never going to be the driving factor that encourages a customer 
to choose one bank over another. It should therefore not be seen as a point of competition, but a basic fundamental of running a reliable service and looking after customers. The smaller market size means that banks in the Nordics have been able to take a particularly forward‐looking stance on fraud, pooling their resources to take a collaborative approach to fraud. Although larger market sizes mean that this may be difficult to replicate elsewhere, there may be lessons to be learned from this refusal to compete on security.Disruptive technology and innovation for innovation’s sake may appeal to a small community of early adopters, but for banks, it is about taking on a technology that fits seamlessly into its business model, without causing any unnecessary interruption – either to business operations or user experience. PWC’s Retail Banking 2020 report predicts that in four years’ time “banks will organise themselves around customers instead of products or channels”.
2 Strong, unobtrusive security, which 
balances rigorous security with minimum interruption, will be critical as they seek to deliver a seamless customer experience and service across all channels.
2 PwC, “Retail Banking 2020 Evolution or Revolution?”, https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/banking‐
capital‐markets/banking‐2020/assets/pwc‐retail‐banking‐2020‐evolution‐or‐revolution.pdf.
FinTech Solu TionS111Ultra‐Fast Text Analytics in 
Trading Strategies
By Markus Schicho  
CEO, Econob
and Karin Hodnigg
Product Manager, Econob
Oh, the bitter irony. 28 April 2015 was a dark day for Twitter – one‐fifth of its 
shareholder value was annihilated in a matter of minutes due to a tweet, published on its own service, “#BREAKING: Twitter $TWTR Q1 Revenue misses estimates, $436M vs $456.52M expected”. The tweet contained disappointing results, below what were considered to be humble earnings expectations.
Traders started to sell nearly immediately, volumes rocketed, and prices fell. This 
resulted in a trading halt, only to be followed by plummeting share prices. Millions of shareholder value was destroyed in minutes, as shown in the following Figure.
This example demonstrates impressively news impact on stock prices, immediately 
and drastically. And social media can be even more relevant when it comes to the immediacy of the impact.
Figure:  Twitter stock prices affected by news 
Source: econob$ 37,5$ 40,0$ 42,5$ 45,0$ 47,5$ 50,0$ 52,5$ 55,0
NASDAQ prematurely tweets
about TWTR's profit warning
Twitter forced to
publish quarterly results 
Trading suspendedApril, 28th - 29th 2015
28.04.2015 09:3028.04.2015 09:4528.04.2015 10:0028.04.2015 10:1528.04.2015 10:3028.04.2015 10:4528.04.2015 11:0028.04.2015 11:1528.04.2015 11:3028.04.2015 11:4528.04.2015 12:0028.04.2015 12:1528.04.2015 12:3028.04.2015 12:4528.04.2015 13:0028.04.2015 13:1528.04.2015 13:3028.04.2015 13:4528.04.2015 14:0028.04.2015 14:1528.04.2015 14:3028.04.2015 14:4528.04.2015 15:0028.04.2015 15:1528.04.2015 15:3028.04.2015 15:4529.04.2015 09:3029.04.2015 09:4529.04.2015 10:0029.04.2015 10:1529.04.2015 10:3029.04.2015 10:4529.04.2015 11:0029.04.2015 11:1529.04.2015 11:3029.04.2015 11:4529.04.2015 12:00112
FinTech Solu TionS112Listed companies are required to publish their financial results quarterly. These 
numbers provide investors and customers alike with an overview of company performance. Business calendars allocate publication dates so that they are known in advance. However, companies are bound to publish any event affecting their share prices at any given time via the RIS (Regulatory Information Service) before the information is published elsewhere.
At first glance, good or bad results, expectations, and stock prices have an obvious 
correlation, so an impact can be easily explained. However, sometimes the expectations were not that far off, or losses were anticipated, so the price structure cannot always be determined in a straightforward manner. Markets are way more complex than one assumes at first glance, and volatility provides both risk and chances.
News beyond a mere result announcement is far more challenging. Take for 
example the June 2015 situation in Greece. Struggling and torn between hopes and dark fears, the market situation was very inconsistent with contradictory news and tweets. Greece had been massively talked about in 2015 – fears and hopes had been expressed in headlines, news, reports, and tweets. On Twitter, there were an amazingly high number of tweets regarding Greece, ranging from hundreds to thousands of tweets per minute, often expressing strong opinions. Optimistic and hopeful news and tweets were taking turns with very negative views – all stumbling in by the minute and massively affecting stocks.
Real‐time Impact
News is far more general than an announcement that simply includes numbers. It contains analyses and reports, outlooks and what‐if scenarios, rather than concrete figures. These contribute massively to a market mood, an overall attitude towards companies, countries, and branches. It is most important to state that not every news story has the potential to turn markets. But such stories do exist and have enormous stored potential. And then, it is a matter of seconds until markets react.
Profit warnings that miss or exceed targets can fiercely and immediately impact stock 
prices. If such news arrive during trading hours, chaos can ensue: as seen above, one tweet sufficed to annihilate one‐fifth of Twitter’s shareholder value. However, one should add that weak fundamentals and negative expectations amplified the effect.
Although not true for Twitter, where the negative effects persisted for months, the 
agitation triggered by news often calms down after only a few minutes. The ripples decrease and the effects are rather short‐lived. Most importantly for traders, experience shows that the major adjustment to the information released (and the window for trading 
profits) lasts about 40 seconds .
1 This means traders have less than a minute to read 
the news, compare the numbers against their expectations, decide whether to buy, and trigger a trading action accordingly (and correctly). And still finish second, or third.
The News Impact Triangle
There are three major players when it comes to news trading. First, renowned news agencies such as Dow Jones, Thomson Reuters, and Bloomberg distribute thousands of news stories per day, thoroughly researched. Then there is the rather new channel of social media, reacting faster, but less well researched, more emotional and emotive, but acting upon thousands of opinions that may or may not reflect the market sentiment. And finally, there are stock exchanges and regulatory services that target market stabilization. This means that the publication of quarterly results is likely to be handled outside of stock trading hours to avoid high volatilities.
Automatic Text Analysis 
Fundamentals
When extracting information from any given text, many issues arise. Finding 
words, sentences, numbers, named entities, concepts, and ideas while keeping the context, both semantically and grammatically, are major topics in linguistics. However, these approaches are all far from being feasibly executed in real time. When analysing financial texts, the financial and economic perspective requires a focused analysis that can be executed in milliseconds. Thus, any software that hopes to support traders must enhance the analysis and diminish execution times.
Entity Identification, Wordings, and 
Indicators
First, the named entities and concepts such as countries, companies, and persons, 
such as CEOs and political leaders, need to be categorized. Secondly, number identification must be precise; and as different formats and number representations 
1 Larry Swedroe, “The impact of news events on market prices”, CBS News, http://www.
cbsnews.com/news/the‐impact‐of‐news‐events‐on‐market‐prices.
FinTech Solu TionS113With ATRAP, you can have real‐time news trading software that is capable of these 
textual analyses and has immense potential to configure trades after unstructured text has been analysed. To be precise, a trader configures that they sell their IBM shares if their expectations of $25 billion are not met, and buy shares, if they are. Whenever news arrives, ATRAP checks for the facts and if these conditions are met (either way), it automatically places an order in the market. The following Figure shows an ATRAP screenshot with a successful trade. The analysis performance allows ATRAP to place orders often ahead of others, and before any trading halts may occur.
Wordings are easier to detect – either they are present in a text or not. However, 
often the impact on stock prices is more difficult to estimate. But with higher risks come higher profit opportunities. On several occasions, ATRAP has demonstrated its capabilities and has been amongst the first trades worldwide after an event occurred.
Events and Investment Decisions
The identification of analyst ratings in texts such as “Credit Suisse raised Daimler from HOLD to BUY” can be performed with an automated analysis. Credit Suisse is the rating agency, Daimler the rated company, and the rating event “raised from hold to buy” indicates a positive development. Using this in the private investment sector where no structural data feeds are available could be interesting.
Since the identification of rating events is possible – how about the identification of 
more generic events? Political events, business events such as company mergers, resigning CEOs, or even natural disasters – people can learn about all of these. Using this information, traders can be warned immediately, or informed if an event occurred or posed a high risk to their investments.
Sentiments and Opinion Mining
Emotive news, or polarizing social media coverage can have an enormous impact on company or asset perception, both positively and negatively. This emotional perspective, the “guts” of the market mood, is often expressed in analyses, market reports and, increasingly, on social media channels. A news‐ and Twitter‐based evaluation of market moods must reflect the newest tweets, reports, and analyses are critical, any automation must be able to handle different alphanumerical formats and translate them into concrete values. In the financial context, only concepts that the trader is interested in need to be found to avoid information overflow. An application that truly supports a trader must thus offer possibilities to select interesting concepts and allow them to configure what they would want to react to. Configuration, selection, and personal interest and experience are essential.
Here, the distinction between wordings and phrases and indicators is crucial. While 
wordings consist of phrases such as “low demand, decreasing sales, reducing forecast”, describing what economic situations or events can occur, financial results and numbers are more delicate. Indicators are always referenced with a number, and often with a time period connected to it. Readers easily distinguish between the numbers 2015 and 2016; software needs to be taught to enhance pure numbers with time or unit information.
Considering the short news text in the Figure which follows, a lot of information is 
presented in an unstructured manner. Red/dark-grey annotations highlight the company to be found in the text, green/medium-grey annotations show indicators, and light green/light-grey highlighting shows the numbers found in the text. Now comes the most critical step: these different indicators, wordings, time periods, persons, or companies are linked and are interrelated in their context. So we discover that in this example IBM’s revenue fell to $22.4 billion in the third quarter. Traders could use this precise information to sell shares if their expectations had not been met, or otherwise buy them.
Figure:  Annotated text
Source: ATRAP
114
FinTech Solu TionS114Figure:  ATRAP screenshot – a successful trade after information extraction
Source: ATRAP
to be of use. Repeated media coverage of a topic is more likely to have an impact 
than a single news item and the credibility of the author or news source has its part to play too. Automatic assessment of sentiments in text (linguistically‐based opinion mining and sentiment analysis) requires both expert financial knowledge and a deep understanding of how different opinions are conveyed on different media platforms – Twitter has a distinct vocabulary, each language and even each domain has diverse patterns and phrases used to express opinions.
The identification of concepts and entities such as analysts, companies, or 
countries in texts has been discussed before, explaining how concepts can be identified. Linguistic patterns expressing positive or negative sentiment can then be assigned to the identified company. The example in the following Figure 
Figure:  Sentiment analysis example
Source: lingrep.com
allows two different assessments (growing/stalling outlook) to be assigned to the corresponding stock.
FinTech Solu TionS115The Twitter item is described as “seemingly stalling”, while Facebook is presented 
as “growing” – resulting in a negative assessment for the former and a positive assessment for the latter. The distinctive assignment of each assessment to the correct item is fundamental to econob’s linguistic engine and crucial for any further analysis. A set of different opinions regarding one concept can be aggregated, resulting in one single assessment for a company in one piece of text. An analysis of even shorter texts helps gain an overview, especially if there is a lot of information present. See for example the tweets about Greece in the following Figure.first and foremost making direct use of given information as fast as possible – when trading the news. But this is by no means the only application imaginable. Derived information can be stored in a news information database. Such a huge knowledge base can then connect news items, events, results, and numbers (all enriched with temporal information).
Sentiments do not affect stock prices the way events and ad‐hoc news do, since 
stock markets are more reliant on volumes, and a crowd‐based assessment of moods on particular topics, so their application is by nature different. Sentiments can first and foremost serve two purposes in the financial market (apart from a financial application, sentiments are immensely important for journalists, marketers, and public relations officers). First, alerts can be provided if the market mood is changing. Second, sentiments can serve as a filter for emerging hot topics, companies, or branches.
Innovative Technologies in the 
Financial Market – a Critical View
In Europe, news‐based trading is still in its infancy. Traders are rarely confronted 
with both the possibilities and necessities of news trading; instead trading still remains based on fundamentals or solidly established traditional models. Investors and traders who are aware of the novel possibilities presented by news trading often already use the latest technologies and incorporate them into internal processes. However, financial institutions are sometimes not able to adapt internal processes to incorporate news‐based trading, with budgetary questions proven to be a critical and sensitive issue.
The potential of automated text analysis in news trading is immense. Although 
workflows have to be adapted and thus bear an inherent risk, this is the next challenge that needs to be taken on in financial technologies. Stamina is required on the part of the FinTech companies. Potent industry partners are important and workflows need to be adapted.
But there is no alternative to innovation when one is aiming for success.Figure:  Greece tweet assessment
Source: twiction.lingrep.com
Hope and a positive outlook are rated “good” while austerity, debt, and failure 
are negatively connoted; they result in a “very bad” evaluation of a tweet. The automatic evaluation of thousands of tweets and news items thus allows an ultra‐fast, impartial, and extensive evaluation of market sentiment, one which is up‐to‐the minute rather than being available one week later. The most important aspect, though, is that these results are transparent, comprehensible, and repeatable.
Applications for Automated Text 
Analysis
Extracting information from natural and unstructured text, the compilation of events 
described, and the detection of sentiment or assessment is a fascinating capability that has enormous implications for workflows (no need to read thousands of texts) and manifold applications. Applications for information deduction and identification are 116
FinTech Solu TionS116Regulated Crowdfunding 
Ecosystems
By Oscar A. Jofre 
Founder & CEO, KoreConX
Regulated crowdfunding is where an online portal is used to sell securities (shares 
or debt instruments) in a company to a crowd of investors. Securities regulators govern regulated crowdfunding, and they determine the conduct between the issuer (company), investors, and the broker/dealer that is required to operate the regulated crowdfunding portal.
It is important for all the participants in the regulated crowdfunding ecosystem to 
understand how it all works and their role within that ecosystem. The ecosystem requires infrastructure to be fully integrated and seamless, providing the benefits of compliance and transparency with respect to regulatory requirements. Mutual cooperation between all participants of the ecosystem will help it become effective, efficient, and successful.
The following Figure shows the participants of the ecosystem and some of their 
responsibilities. 
The goal of the ecosystem is to help the issuer and investor come together in 
the most efficient manner through the regulated crowdfunding portals.  Below are more details about each of the participants that need to work together on a global scale.
Securities Commissions are mandated by their respective governments to enforce 
and administer securities laws and govern the securities industries in their jurisdictions.  In the area of regulated crowdfunding, the Commissions regulate which investors and issuers can participate, how portal operators conduct business, and report back to the Securities Commissions.  The primary goal is to protect investors and ensure a straightforward, compliant marketplace.
A great example of such a regulation is the Jobs Act Title II, Title III, and Title IV 
in the United States. The US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) clearly outlines all the rules and regulations that relate to crowdfunding in the US. The Jobs Act provides clarity for issuers (companies), investors, third‐party providers, and portals on how to operate, manage, conduct, and report.
By providing this clarity, the USA has flourished with the implementation of the Jobs 
Act. On 23 September 2013 Title II went live and $118 billion was filed with the SEC for those intending to raise capital up to November 2014. What is even more remarkable is that over $30 billion of what was filed was raised. This clearly demonstrates that the ecosystem is working and only getting better. On 30 October 2015, the SEC voted 3–1 to allow Title III to go live. Under this Title, non‐accredited investors can invest a minimum of $2,000 up to a maximum of 10% of their income or assets in companies that are raising up to $1m in funds. This means that there are now a potential 233.7 million new investors in the US, up from 8.5 million, and that companies doing this type of fundraising could have 500 new shareholders to manage.
Figure:  Crowdfunding ecosystem participants and responsibilities
Source  : Koreconex
FinTech Solu TionS117One of the key reasons why regulated crowdfunding is a global phenomenon is the 
marketing that the USA, the SEC, and the promoters of the Jobs Act have done to advocate the value to investors, issuers, and governments that are being pressured to create jobs and increase the flow of capital.
Accredited investors are those investors deemed by the Securities Commissions 
to be high net worth individuals who would not be catastrophically impacted financially if an investment in a company seeking funds through regulated crowdfunding failed. These investors are considered to be sophisticated and able to make appropriate judgements about their investments. Typically, in any country around the world, 3–5% of the population would be considered accredited investors. What is surprising to many in the global marketplace is that only a very small percentage of even accredited investors get the opportunity to see and invest in private placement financings.
John Kaiser, a researcher in private markets in North America, conducted a 
research report focused on investors in private placements in Canada. Mr Kaiser points out in his report that in the past 10 years in Canada, in the private placements available to the accredited investors, only 1% of those qualified were given the opportunity to invest.
Non‐accredited investors are the “rest of us”, the rest of the country’s population 
that does not meet the requirements to be registered as an accredited investor, and have been demanding access to early‐stage investment opportunities. In most countries this type of investor needs to be of legal age (usually 18 years of age) and will be given restrictions on the amount they can invest in one particular issuer (company). The regulators have done this to protect unsophisticated investors.  Regulators may ease these restrictions over time, in order to allow the non‐accredited investors to invest more, but the ecosystem will first need to demonstrate the positive progress and impact regulated crowdfunding is making.
Examples of countries that have been very progressive in allowing non‐accredited 
investors to invest in companies through the regulated crowdfunding portals are:
•	Canada, providing investors over the age of 18 with the opportunity to invest 
in private or public listed companies through an exemption called the “offering memorandum”. This gives a private issuer access to over 28 million Canadians.•	Other countries such as the UK, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Italy, Thailand, Spain, France, Germany, and others have also created rules over the past 12 months to allow non‐accredited investors to invest in private placements.
Now that Title III has been given final approval in the USA, equity crowdfunding is about to become truly democratic. As a lead market, the USA has set the example, and the rest of the equity crowdfunding world is sure to follow.
Regulated crowdfunding portals bring issuers and investors together. It sounds 
simple, but in order to operate a regulated crowdfunding portal in most countries in the world you need to be a registered broker/dealer. The reason for this requirement is to ensure that issuers are being vetted properly to protect the marketplace and investors. The portal has a regulatory responsibility to perform due diligence on each issuer to make sure it meets all regulatory requirements in the jurisdiction in which the regulated portal is operating. The portal can also choose to add further due diligence steps and demand additional information to further enhance their screening process. The portals are also required (depending on the exemption being used in the private placement) to do investor accreditation, anti‐money laundering, and in some cases suitability checks, to make sure the investment is right for the investor. The portals have to be registered with Securities Commissions and it is often necessary to take securities and compliance courses to meet regulatory requirements. There are portals providing investment opportunities for accredited and non‐accredited investors.  Portals can choose which sector or sectors they would like to operate in. In a very short period of time, the market is showing that investors are attracted to regulated portals operating in specific verticals. Today you can find regulated portals in: mining, oil and gas, real estate, technology, cannabis, restaurants, franchises, life sciences, and mobile apps, among others.
The most successful regulated crowdfunding portals globally have very similar 
characteristics: they operate fully transparently, and they have dedicated individuals to the growth of this newly emerging sector. The entire global marketplace owes the emergence of regulated crowdfunding to “ASSOB”, the world’s first regulated crowdfunding portal, operating for 12 years with zero fraud, and having helped companies in Australia raise over $150 million. The ASSOB success story has been an example of how regulated crowdfunding works and the benefits it can provide for investors, issuers, and the country.118
FinTech Solu TionS118be required to have audited financial statements and, likely, to have some form of 
offering document. You need them to make sure that what you are putting out in the market meets regulatory conditions, and to maintain your ongoing legal obligations.
The participants in the background provide technology and services to the entire 
ecosystem to facilitate the process of pre‐during‐post regulated crowdfunding transactions. These participants can include pre‐crowd service providers, video production companies, investor networks, social media and marketing professionals, and many others.
The regulated crowdfunding ecosystem is possible today because of these four key 
pillars:
1.
 Technology
2. Internet
3. Social media
4. Progressive governments.
The nature of these markets and the way business is done can change rapidly 
and governments are responsible for laying a proper foundation on which businesses and people can grow and conduct their business. The advances in technology and social media allow us to bring a message to billions of people across the globe in seconds. The way we communicate, collaborate, and invest has changed forever.
Regulated crowdfunding uses the four pillars and brings together all the 
participants to work together cohesively. For anyone, anywhere in the world, involved in regulated crowdfunding, these are very exciting times.The most surprising part of regulated crowdfunding has been that the real estate industry sector has been leading the way with the highest level of investments. Real estate has taken the regulated crowdfunding sector by storm with global leaders such as Prodigy Networks, RealtyMogul, and FundRise taking centre stage. This is only the beginning, and other industry sectors, such as mining, oil and gas, biotech, life sciences, and technology, are just starting to emerge. What we see around the globe today is that regulated crowdfunding portals are building trust with online investors. The key to this is the focus on transparency under which the ecosystem operates. Without this transparency, regulated crowdfunding would fail.
Issuers exchange shares or debt instruments, which are considered securities 
under current regulations, for investors’ money.  For issuers, regulated crowdfunding is the holy grail of raising capital, as it allows them to be in direct contact with their investors.  Crowdfunding brings great exposure to a new crowd, and that can assist with future rounds of financing.  Private companies in the United States, Israel, and the United Kingdom have used this regulated crowdfunding model with much success. However, one of the biggest responsibilities issuers have in a regulated crowdfunding ecosystem is the requirement for transparency. They must be open to providing information at each stage of a crowdfunding campaign: pre‐transaction, during the transaction, and post‐transaction to keep the investors, regulators, and portal operators happy.
Third‐party providers are also very important in the ecosystem. Think of them as 
the chassis in a car. You can have the best engine, fuel, and tyres but without the chassis you go nowhere. Yes, they are that important. They are essential as your first internal crowd to get you started.
In regulated crowdfunding you need your lawyers and accountants, as you would 
in most financing rounds, to ensure you meet regulatory requirements. You may 
FinTech Solu TionS119Remittances – International FX 
Payments at Low Cost
By Michael David Wolper
CMO, GlobeOne 
A major paradigm shift is afoot in the financial world. Specifically, we are poised 
to see explosive growth in the mobile banking space that would not have been possible at any prior time in history. Currently, there are 2 billion underserved adults when it comes to traditional financial services. Couple that with the 1.93 billion readily connected smartphone consumers, and it becomes clear: the move toward mobile banking is all but inevitable. Real‐life events show how mobile banking growth has the potential to positively impact countless lives.
Consider a remote, underserved village in Mexico, where every month a designated 
townsman is tasked with driving several hours to the nearest money transfer office, to retrieve funds wired by relatives in the States. After haemorrhaging money on fuel, transaction fees, and other expenses, our ambassador returns home holding a fraction of the amount originally sent. Now consider the same transaction done over a smartphone app, without having to travel, at a cost significantly less than that associated with traditional bricks‐and‐mortar banks. Not only is this methodology eminently possible, it is all but inevitable! Indeed, this evolved way of doing things could very well become “the new normal”. You need simply view the technological landscape through a younger generational lens to appreciate it for the reality it is en route to becoming.
“Digital Natives” and “Digital 
Immigrants”
In the march towards the use of advanced technology, there is clearly no turning 
back. But for millennials and younger‐aged consumers, the writing has always been on the wall. Simply put: the use of internet technology and electronic gadgetry is all they have ever known. In a 2001 essay, writer Marc Prensky coined the terms “digital natives” and “digital immigrants” to describe generational differences in digital usage. Essentially defined, digital immigrants’ lives have straddled both the pre‐digital and digital eras, whereas digital natives have only ever known the latter. 
1 Andy Kiersz, “Here’s Where Migrant Workers In America Send Their Money”, The Business 
Insider, 8 April 2014, http://www.businessinsider.com.au/world‐bank‐us‐remittance‐map‐2014‐4.And there is no question which group will have a greater economic influence on banking – and all other sectors, for that matter – as they grow to occupy a larger percentage of the consumer base.
The “natives” versus “immigrants” distinction is mostly about perspective. An 
immigrant using a retail banking website to pay a bill is apt to consciously notice: “I’m paying bills online instead of visiting a branch”, whilst natives do not have that consciousness. For them, branches never factored into their lives. Due to this phenomenon, retail banks must retrofit their ways of doing business, by stepping up their migration from physical platforms to electronic solutions. Failure to do so could result in their outright extinction. To be fair, banks largely know this, and are slowly but surely embracing electronic distribution formats. But they are making electronic delivery systems add‐on components, when they should be making them their chief focus, second to their bricks‐and‐mortar operations. This is a case of the proverbial tail wagging the dog.
One way to remedy this is by giving customers the option to bank over mobile 
phone applications, which should be as fundamental to retail banking models as ATMs were in the 1970s, call centres were in the 1980s, and internet channels were in the 1990s and the early 2000s. It is up to each banking establishment to fully honour the changes to come – and likely profit by doing so.
The Power of Remittances
The potential social aspect of mobile phone app transactions can be astounding, especially when it comes to global remittances. Defined as the “transfer of money by a foreign worker to an individual in his or her home country”, remittances currently amount to more than $583 billion annually. As of 2013, in the US alone, more than 41 million people could be identified as international migrants. Furthermore, according to the World Bank, in 2012, Mexico received $23 billion in remittances from the US – about 50% of the total outflow, followed by China ($13 billion), India ($11.9 billion), and the Philippines ($10.6 billion).
1 What is 
to be gleaned from this phenomenon? Apparently, the desire to give back is a universal impulse.120
FinTech Solu TionS120Economist Dilip Ratha describes the promise of remittances as “dollars wrapped 
with love”, as the money sent offers untold potential for economic development and social change. “Remittances empower people,” says Ratha. “We must do all we can to make remittances safer and cheaper. It can be done and I want to help people break free from the cycle of poverty.”
But while the majority of funds sent home go towards helping family members with 
regular monthly bills, philanthropic motivations have recently come to occupy a larger role in the remittance space. We are witnessing a pivot, where it is no longer just the migrant labour force sending money to their families for sustenance. Expats are now sending philanthropic remittances as a way of helping their native countries in times of need. The 2015 Nepalese earthquake killed more than 9,000 people and injured more than 23,000. It flattened entire villages, leaving hundreds of thousands of people homeless. After the tragedy struck, large sums of money flowed to the country from the Nepalese diaspora. Compassionate people yearned to help their fellow countrymen with the rescue and rebuilding efforts – a collective act of good will that truly made a difference. After all, Nepal is one of Asia’s poorest countries, with little ability to fund major reconstruction efforts on its own.
A bit further back in time, the 2004 Indonesian tsunami killed at least 230,000 
people across 14 countries, including India, Sri Lanka, Thailand, the Maldives, and Somalia. Combined, the Nepalese quake and the Indonesian tsunami inspired some US$14 billion in remittance aid, funnelled through worldwide relief organizations. Philanthropic remittances are a very good thing. They contribute to a country’s overall inflow of capital, ultimately serving to lower that country’s borrowing costs in times of distress.
But sending money can be costly. Whether the recipient is an individual, a family, 
or a relief organization, the senders are saddled with the same hefty transaction fees, which can cost an average of 7.72% of the total amount sent.
2 And these 
costs can quickly add up. In 2014, fees from the $485 billion in remittances sent worldwide exceeded the total funds Mexico received in remittances overall.
3 Putting the transfer fee burden in even sharper context, according to an Overseas Development Institute remittance report released in 2014, two of the world’s largest money transfer operators – Western Union and MoneyGram – account for two‐thirds of the money transfers to Africa, where an average of 12% of the amount sent back to relatives in sub‐Saharan Africa is lost to transfer fees. This is enough to pay for the primary school education for 14 million children in the region!
Technology offers the promise of reduced fees, placing more funds into the hands of 
the remitters’ intended targets. With streamlined transactions like GoMoney slashing up to 5% from the 7.9% global average transfer fees typical with traditional banking structures, mobile banking services can direct some $34 billion back into the pockets of those people who need it the most. It is a new way for banks to give back to the community, and a humanitarian outreach made possible by smartphone technology.
Millennial Outreach
Companies boasting charitable components are likely to resonate particularly loudly with millennials, who champion a robust urge to give back. Smart businesses are taking notice.
Take online glasses retailer, Warby Parker. Riffing on the old adage “Give a man 
a fish and you feed him for a day; teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime”, for every pair of glasses Warby Parker sells, the company sends cash to a non‐profit partner that helps teach local entrepreneurs in low‐income countries to start their own glasses business. In essence, Warby Parker earns profits, while simultaneously helping poor communities to help themselves. It is a win‐win scenario.
The Future of Banking
In any discussion about banking, the question invariably arises: “Will cash use ever become obsolete?” This is an important question to ask, but a nearly impossible one to answer since there are conflicting views on this topic.
On the one hand, people have been predicting the demise of cash for years, 
spurred on by the buzz around Apple Pay and crypto‐currencies. But as recently as 2 Source: The World Bank, https://remittanceprices.worldbank.org/en.
3 The World Bank, “Remittances to Developing Countries to Grow by 5 Percent This Year, While 
Conflict‐Related Forced Migration is at All‐Time High, Says WB Report”, 6 October 2014,  
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press‐release/2014/10/06/remittances‐developing‐countries‐five‐percent‐conflict‐related‐migration‐all‐time‐high‐wb‐report.
FinTech Solu TionS121feature phones and smartphones are making their way into the hands of consumers 
everywhere.
Young people are likely to outgrow cash. The practical timetable for this to 
happen is a judgment call. But a mobile phone banking app that will allow people to seamlessly conduct banking business in both cash‐based or a cashless environment is likely to truly capture market share, and make banking easier.
John Lennon famously asked us to “imagine all the people, sharing all the world”. 
Could he have ever predicted just how globally connected the world would one day become, due to advances in FinTech?2013, cash was still used for about 85% of global consumer transactions, according to a MasterCard report.
4 In most developing countries, it remains the default mode 
of payment for the vast majority of consumers – even in places like Kenya, where mobile payment tools have experienced a runaway success.
It is easy to see why many analysts maintain the belief that cash is here to stay. 
But there are equally persuasive reasons to believe it will go, especially when governments seem to be eager to jettison cash. A case in point: the US is making federal payments like Social Security and veterans’ benefits exclusively by electronic means. And India’s government has issued biometric IDs to its citizens, laying the groundwork for a cashless society and opening the door to financial inclusion. Adding to that, mobile access has spread around the world, as both 
4 MasterCard, “MasterCard Advisors’ Cashless Journey. The Global Journey From Cash to 
Cashless”, 15 September 2013, http://www.mastercardadvisors.com/_assets/pdf/Master 
CardAdvisors‐CashlessSociety.pdf.122
FinTech Solu TionS122FinTech Solutions for Small 
Businesses
By Luke Hally 
CEO & Founder, DragonBill
Who would have thought that the combination of finance and technology could 
result in something exciting? It may have seemed unlikely, but FinTech has emerged as the hottest sector on the planet. No doubt, this is due to its heart being centred in London, the start‐up and finance capital of Europe. But it is also a global phenomenon. In the US, New York City has retained its position at the top of the finance industry. It is keeping tech talent away from the west coast with a thriving FinTech community and collaboration between established players and emerging start‐ups. In Africa FinTech is helping the unbanked perform transactions in a secure and convenient manner. South East Asia also has a number of emerging FinTech hubs. Hong Kong and Singapore are building on their existing trade and service economies, creating FinTech hubs such as the FinTech Innovation Lab in Hong Kong run by Accenture and partnering with banks from around the globe. Startupbootcamp FinTech was launched in Singapore. In Australia, a number of co‐working spaces and incubators have appeared.
The traditional financial players get a lot of press time in FinTech‐related news: 
Goldman Sachs in New York, Barclays in London, and Accenture in Hong Kong, while banks in China are quietly snapping up as much FinTech talent as they can. We are hearing about great improvements in efficiency and usability in existing systems. Any improvement is good, but are all these revolutionary? Are they disruptive? I see entrenched market leaders leveraging regulation to keep competition out. Performing counter‐disruption manoeuvres, disrupting the disruption before it begins.
In New York, we may be seeing the emergence of a new trend of outsourcing 
disruption, or in modern parlance, “Disruption as a Service”. Acqui‐hire used to be seen as the lowest rung of the exit ladder for start‐ups. Now we are seeing start‐ups set this as their goal, turning would‐be entrepreneurs into employees. The banks are successfully using the FinTech boom as a recruiting platform. Isn’t a revolution supposed to be replacing existing systems with better ones? This brings us to the question: what is disruption? Is disruption something we should be aspiring to? Clayton M. Christensen, the creator of the theory of disruptive innovation  said: “Disruptive technologies typically enable new markets to emerge.”
1 Disruption is not 
merely the unseating of the market leader – that is successful competition. It means changing the rules of the game, which enables a new player to beat the record holder.
The record holders in finance have been playing for a long time and have amassed 
enormous wealth and power. So much power that governments have become dependent on their continued operation – as we saw with $1 trillion bailouts in the US during the global financial crisis. This large centralization of wealth, power, and regulation makes competition difficult and leads to a lack of it. We all know who the losers are when there is a lack of competition – consumers. Consumers lose either through price or lack of access.
Power in the market means the control of supply and distribution of goods or 
services. If you have power, you can dictate price and access. Disruption is the decentralization of this power, and once supply is democratized, so too is demand because consumers now have a choice. In the case of FinTech it will coincide with a spread of wealth. As more players enter the market, wealth will flow from the banks to these alternative players. As consumers get a better deal due to competition and more efficient solutions (banks have large legacy systems they must support), more wealth stays in their pockets, making everyone a little better off. Disruption is the free market in action, slowly being freed from the shackles of existing legacies by technology.
Small and medium‐sized enterprises (SMEs) are the key beneficiaries of disruptive 
start‐ups. Their talent pools are shallower and their needs less complex than large enterprises, so they rely on outsourcing expertise. They are willing to try new tools that will have a tangible impact on their business. This also suits small agile start‐up teams. SMEs function as the engines of many economies, globally responsible for 80% of economic activity. And they are now beginning to benefit from the FinTech revolution. In Australia, SMEs are a critical part of the economy, making up 97% of business and employing 47% of the workforce. Melbourne – in the Australian south‐eastern state of Victoria – is the traditional centre of finance and a city of diverse cultures. The government is supporting entrepreneurs through a number of initiatives. The AU$60 million Start‐up Victoria initiative was launched to develop high‐growth innovative businesses, including FinTech, as well as the AU$200 million Future Industries Fund, which has a focus on professional and financial services. 
1 Clayton Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to 
Fail (Harvard Business Review Press, 1997).
FinTech Solu TionS123The government will draw on a $500 million Premier’s Jobs and Investment Fund 
to support high‐priority initiatives. With these factors and support it is no surprise Melbourne is the home of a wide range of FinTech start‐ups servicing SMEs.
Good financial advice can make or break an SME. A qualified adviser can fill gaps 
in knowledge. Importantly, they can also identify opportunities, reducing risk and increasing efficiency. FinancialAsk, for instance, makes financial advice easy to get by offering it through apps and the web, making quality advice accessible. With the right advice, businesses are equipped to make decisions, but they need tools to track the implementation. Cash flow is a concern for many SMEs. Boomeringo is a budgeting and a cash flow management tool, originally aimed at consumers and income earners. After launching their app, they discovered that a significant portion of their users were SMEs. The app connects with banks, credit cards, and loan accounts and, using algorithms, sorts spending and cash flow into categories as well as merchants. It not only helps with budgeting, but also with bill payment reminders. The powerful analytics platform increases users’ financial intelligence through experience.
In addition, even if an SME has good cash flow, they may still need loans for capital 
or expansion. Moula is a data‐driven alternative lending platform for Australian SMEs, providing quick and simple funding based on an SME’s transaction data and corporate profile. Its online application process has been designed to be fast, making it easy for a business to access funding without the process and paperwork of traditional banking. Like many start‐ups, Moula was born out of personal experience, in this case, the challenges of obtaining finance for a family business.
Of course, all the tools in the world are not going to help a business unless they 
are getting paid. Civilizations have been using money as a transactional device since around 600 
BC. Payment for goods and services in a face‐to‐face transaction 
is straightforward. You make your payment and receive your goods. Receiving payment where the customer is remote is a problem as old as business itself. Customers are hesitant to pay before receiving goods or services and businesses are hesitant to provide them before they receive payment.
After being foreseen in Edward Bellamy’s 1888 book, Looking Backward, we saw 
the first multi‐merchant card, the Diners Club Card, in 1950, and in 1982 electronic funds transfer at point of sale (EFTPOS) was introduced. The introduction of credit cards and EFTPOS saw a consolidation of institutional power. Banks were no longer just for business accounts and places for loans and savings. They became the central facilitator of transactions. While this may be seen as disruptive to cash, it does not satisfy our earlier definition. If your business does not accept electronic payment, it will lose business. We have seen examples of this in Australia. Several of the “Big Four” banks had system crashes, meaning businesses could not accept card payments. The media reported customers leaving stores without purchasing because of this. This is every business’s nightmare.
This throws into sharp relief the need for competition and the need for disruption of 
payments. After some false starts in the 1990s with NetBank and DigiCash, in 1999 the original disruptor PayPal was born, now being followed by numerous others. As business and technology have evolved, we have seen the nature of payments change to suit the context of the transaction. In some instances, we are seeing the blurring of the online and offline worlds. Think of paying for an Uber trip, no swiping, no PIN codes, just get out of the car. As these platforms have built trust, and as online shopping grows in popularity, we have witnessed the emergence of payment escrow, where payment is held until the goods are received. This obviously benefits the customer because they know they will maintain control over the payment until they receive the goods. It also benefits SMEs. If the business is not well known, they have no reputation and no reason to expect trust from the customer. The customer is taking a risk that the business will deliver on the agreement once payment is made, especially from overseas. If the business accepts escrow options from a well‐known platform, they in effect leverage the trust and reputation of that platform. It is interesting and representative of online trading that escrow has become widely accepted online, before entering traditional offline business transactions, when offline business and customers both have much to gain from such a system.
User context is something that is particularly important for SME tools. The lack 
of a defined process across businesses means it needs to be low‐friction and streamlined to fit into existing processes with low workload and a shallow learning curve. Processes have to be specialized, so the SME can do what they need to do and get back to business – they should not be navigating around features they do not need or use. SMEs are typically run by few people wearing many hats, so the hats need to be as light as possible. The user context of the SME and customer should be encapsulated in a good FinTech payment solution, providing payment options that suit the business, customer, and transaction alike. FinTech is giving SMEs the tools they need to have flexibility of payment so they can get paid and get back to work. These benefits will then flow on to consumers, through a smoother, less stressful transaction, where a better customer experience will emerge. These benefits contribute to a stronger economy and happier population. Viva la revolucion!124
FinTech Solu TionS124Payment Solutions Including 
Apple Pay
By Denis Thomas 
Management Consultant, KPMG
“Are P2P Payments next for Apple Pay?”
“Roger Federer slams Wimbledon all‐white dresscode.”“Pluto shows its spots to NASA probe.”
These are some of the headlines captured from some of the well‐established 
newspapers. Time is a key factor with regards to news. The platform that publishes the news first receives the most traction and eventually the most TRP (Television Rating Point/Target Rating Point) ratings. At this juncture, the network effects work in its favour and all this builds credibility for the news channel and eventually the news network. This chain reaction raises a few questions in my mind:
•	Timing is critical to news but is it to entrepreneurs? Would timing play the same 
role for serial entrepreneurs?
•	Is there really a first‐mover advantage or does it differ on a sectoral basis?
•	Does timing affect tech giants?
We have often heard budding entrepreneurs complain: “That was exactly my idea, and that firm just received $5 million in funding which should have ideally been mine!”
In my view, in today’s dynamically evolving world of payments, timing matters 
and Apple has done a phenomenal job with regards to timing the Apple Pay product launch at the crux of the FinTech and Payments tsunami wave sweeping across the universe. Kudos, Apple! However, the main success of Apple Pay is dependent on its widespread adoption; a world devoid of credit cards and cash. Is that sci‐fi or reality?The Payments Ecosystem
Apple, Google, or Starbucks? Did you say Starbucks?
Apple is a limelight baby and receives all the media attention. Google closely 
follows Apple but the silent player in the payments space is Starbucks, which should definitely get a mention. Starbucks has combined the ease of payments for ordering a Frappuccino via their mobile app and provided additional value to customers by providing a single source for keeping track of all reward programmes in one space. This move has seen a huge adoption amongst consumers that prefer using the mobile app to order to skip the long lines typical of Starbucks outlets in New York and other university joints that witness huge traffic during certain hours of the day. This is in line with CEO Howard Schultz’s ambition of making mobile payments a top priority as Starbucks is the only company that claims 90% of the $1.6 billion spent in US stores was made using a smartphone in 2013.
1
The following Figure shows a sample ecosystem.
1 See http://www.starbucks.co.uk/coffeehouse/mobile‐apps and https://news.starbucks.com/
facts/starbucks‐mobile‐order‐pay‐national‐rollout.Figure:  A sample payment ecosystemPAYPAL
STRIPESQUAREMobile
Payment 
FUNDAMOGONOWPAYOUZENIUSWELLS FARGOFIRST DATATDMONERISAcquirers
VISAMASTERCARD
AMERICAN 
EXPRESSCard
Associations
PAYPAL BITCOIN BOKU AMAZON PAYMENTSClose Loop Payment eWallet
Categorically speaking, there are several players in the payments space, 
classified across e‐wallets (Google Wallet, Visa Checkout, Apple Pay, Swap), bank credit cards (Wells Fargo, HSBC, Chase), business credit cards (Best Buy, 
FinTech Solu TionS125Target), e‐wallet platforms (hyperWallet, Fundamo, GoNow, Payou, Zenius), card 
associations (Visa, MasterCard, American Express), acquirers (Wells Fargo, FirstData, TD, Moneris), processors (Chase, GlobalPayments, FirstData), third‐ party processors (Stripe, PayPal, Square), ISOs (Everlink, Pivotal Payments), point‐of‐sale terminal technology (Ingenico Group, Verifone, Magtek), integrated systems (Micros, Vivonet, Profitek), in‐store terminal payment providers (Chase, Payfirma, GlobalPayments), e‐commerce payment providers (Stripe, Payfirma, Apple Pay, PayPal), recurring billing payment providers (Stripe, PayPal, Payfirma), mobile payment providers (Square, Venmo, Intuit), and tablet POS providers (Vend, NCR, Square, Payfirma).
Another layer, denoted as the close loop payment networks (Amazon Payments, 
Bitcoin, PayPal, Boku, Sometrics, Dwolla) would operate across the entire payment ecosystem layer between consumers and merchants.
The examples cited above cater towards the American market but provide a good 
overview of the players across categories and can be easily used for comparisons across countries.
In 2015, Google Wallet announced its plans to launch the P2P network and 
Apple quickly followed suit. The evolution of such technologies will give rise to newer authentication norms at the device level and position Google/Apple as an evolutionary payment bank. Apple has always drifted away from the complexity of financial transaction processing but the benefits of building one in‐house are not a far‐fetched idea. We could ask Starbucks who recently did that and enjoy over a million transactions as part of their own payment network.
So, would Apple transform into a payment bank? Perhaps, if the benefits add up. 
However, as Starbucks has proved, Google and Apple need to provide something extra so that people begin adopting their technologies. For consumers, it is no longer about payments but about the extra added value.
Energizer Effects
Apple will continue to innovate on the FinTech platform but Apple Pay displays Apple’s vertical integration efficiency through seamless blending of hardware, software, and user‐friendly interfaces into a harmonious ecosystem. The above attributes are specific to Apple Pay and this will definitely energize the iOS ecosystem.
Privacy
Apple does a phenomenal job on privacy concerns by not storing the following:
•	What you bought
•	Where you bought it
•	How much you paid for it.
Apple also refrains from exchanging any credit card information with merchants 
during transactions, which further boosts its security mechanism.
Merchant Adoption
Apple Pay is a new but comprehensive payment solution as 83% of financial institutions across America have already adopted it. An average of 22,000 stores have already signed up to adopt Apple Pay. Some of the names include Starbucks, Whole Foods, Bloomingdales, Disney, etc. Service providers like Uber and Groupon have also climbed aboard.
The above network numbers and the potential to add several more over the 
next year pack plenty of adoption potential for this technology amongst bigger merchants, but would similar tactics attract smaller merchants?
Consumer Adoption
Merchants are adopting Apple Pay and Apple recently published that over 700,000 merchants are on board that have set up operations to accept Apple Pay as a form of payment. But how many of you out there walk into a store with just a phone and no card and no cash? I don’t know any of my friends who do that in developed economies.
Let us change gears a bit and look at the following Figure. What do you see?126
FinTech Solu TionS126through technologies like iBeacon to provide live feeds or additional spot discounts 
on products within one’s vicinity while shopping in a physical store. This approach to analysing big data as it flows in would avoid transactional data storage and spur the development of several applications around this domain. Apple Pay and Apple Watch users would eventually benefit from all these network externalities.
Industry Economics
Gartner (a technology research firm) states that the payment market is expected to generate a total of $721 billion in global transactions by 2017. This depicts a 35% CAGR (Compound Annual Growth Rate) from 2012. Mobile payments are expected to constitute 45% ($325 billion) of these transactions. The NFC (Near Field Communication) segment is expected to be 5% ($36 billion) by 2017 but is growing at 64% CAGR. Overall, this looks extremely lucrative.
Summary
•	Apple Pay re‐energizes the iOS ecosystem and provides a new stream of revenue for Apple.
•	The existing user base of 800 million, plus iTunes’ accounts that already contain credit card information would contribute hugely to its success.
•	Apple Pay has hit privacy concerns smack on their head.
•	Payment industry economics and resulting network externalities may or may not work in Apple’s favour.
•	Regulatory bodies will pay a huge role in the adoption of Apple Pay like similar technologies in emerging economies.
Apple Pay emerges to be by far the most innovative disruptor in the FinTech space. Its simplicity of use, current iTunes’ user base, privacy policies, security features, and comprehensive financial networks that have already been constructed promise a bright future for Apple and several start‐ups that would eventually evolve around this domain.The graphs show the penetration of mobile users vs. credit card users and the percentage of active users in each segment in India. The interesting part to observe is that the penetration of mobile devices and adoption is along similar lines for most emerging economies. This means that technologies that drive usage of payments via a mobile device would prove to be more successful in emerging economies. But, in order to arrive at the ultimate goal of transferring to a world with no cash or credit cards, we also need to shift focus from customer benefits to merchant benefits, as smaller merchants are not jumping on board due to the transaction fees involved. As long as smaller merchants do not adopt Apple Pay, the common people are always going to carry an alternative mode of payment. Apple needs to provide incentives for smaller merchants to enable the widespread adoption of Apple Pay. If I am using Apple Pay, I would like to use it at my grocery store, my service station, my laundromat, and also the street food stall across the corner that serves hot dogs and burgers. The list of usage scenarios is endless but you get my point.
Potential for Data Analytics
Apple is not storing transaction information and one might contend that the potential for big data usage is almost missing in this scenario. Apple alluded to the above through its Cupertino event as data being used for a bigger purpose, which could hint at advertising or other revenue streams. However, Apple could use big data Figure:  Penetration of mobile users vs. credit card users in India 
Source: Secondary Technology Research Providers075150225300375
Mobile UsersMillions
MillionsTotal Active
0714212835
Credit Card UsersTotal Active
FinTech Solu TionS127FinTech Solutions Benefiting 
other Sectors
By Rael Cline 
Co‐Founder & CEO, MediaGamma
The idea of a contract for the future delivery of an asset of a specified volume is not 
new, actually it finds its origins thousands of years ago in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the Roman world. The obvious use case is risk management for both sides of the contract: guaranteed future revenue for the seller and guaranteed future supply at a known price for the buyer.
Fast‐forward in time, the oft‐cited Dutch Tulip Bulb Mania of 1637 allowed 
speculation on future prices via forward contracts, and the first “futures” contract is generally accepted to be the Yodoya rice market in Osaka, Japan around 1650. In modern times, deregulation resulting in increased price volatility, coupled with the newly available computing power from the 1970s, proved to be the catalyst for an explosion in the right to buy or sell at a future date contracts (“options”) and standardized forward contracts, known as futures contracts. Today, the global derivatives market has grown to an astounding US$700 trillion in notional value, across 30 currencies, and is widely used as a risk management tool by companies, investment managers, governments, insurers, energy and commodities firms, and banks alike. Whilst most people think of interest rates, currency, equity, or credit derivatives (or even the more exotic weather and electricity derivatives), this chapter will focus on two other burgeoning opportunities for FinTech companies interested in derivatives: the cloud infrastructure market and the online advertising markets.
Within the current FinTech mind‐set, both of these markets present fantastic 
opportunities, as they both rely heavily on technology, prices are volatile, the underlying assets are (largely) commoditized, and there has been limited skills and knowledge crossover between finance and cloud or online advertising.
Of course, fields such as payments, crypto‐currencies, and crowdfunding will 
be enormously valuable, but the best opportunities lie at the intersection of industries. Nowhere is this more apparent than in combining derivatives with cloud infrastructure and online advertising. The cloud infrastructure market (also referred to as the “Infrastructure as a Service” or “IaaS” market) is the computing infrastructure (computing power, memory, and storage) that is used to power internet applications. Data is stored and processed off‐site and made available on demand from a remote location. The market is worth roughly $16.5 billion, projected to grow at 43% annually for the next five years according to reports.
1 
Amazon pioneered this market in 2006 in terms of offering cloud‐based services to other companies, after solving their own infrastructure scaling problems. Large companies such as Netflix, Dow Jones, Pfizer, and Comcast all use Amazon Web Services (“AWS”) today. Although behemoths such as Microsoft, Salesforce, IBM, Rackspace, and Google are investing billions into the market, Amazon is still leagues ahead, by some accounts four times larger than all its rivals combined.
2 
The interesting feature of cloud services is that they are on‐demand. So, for instance, if there is a sudden increase in the demand for a service, one is able to click a few buttons and fire up some additional infrastructure to meet this demand. AWS introduced this spot market in 2010; however, the volatility in spot pricing creates a large amount of uncertainty for companies that buy in the spot market.
An important step took place in 2013 when Deutsche Börse announced its Cloud 
Exchange AG, a joint venture with Berlin‐based Zimory, which enables participants to trade spot capacity. Although none of the vendors mentioned in the above paragraph is included in the exchange, there are still five vendors to choose from. The exchange offers standardized products and procedures for admission, trading, settlement, and surveillance, and one is able to switch between vendors within the same contract. To get a sense of the contract specifications, storage capacity is traded in data units of at least 1TB, and processing capacity is denominated in at least 10 Performance Units (PU), with one PU representing 8 GBs.
Interestingly, when thinking about derivatives, the industry already has the idea of 
a “reserved instance” or a forward contract that one can re‐sell. Currently, however, one can only re‐sell back to the same vendor and so the market lacks true price discovery. However, given that there are clear use cases around why a buyer would want to hedge future costs for, say Christmas (just think of Netflix’s demands to stream on Christmas Day), it is surely just a matter of time before futures and 
1 TechNavio Report titled: Global IaaS Market 2015–2019, http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/
id/3055225.
2 Business Insider, http://www.businessinsider.sg/aws‐revenue‐is‐bigger‐than‐its‐four‐closest‐
competitors‐combined‐2015‐4/.128
FinTech Solu TionS128options are introduced. Andy Jassy, SVP of AWS said that “AWS has the potential 
to be the largest business at Amazon long‐term, which is significant given that our retail business is a $70 billion business”. This bullishness may not seem so far‐fetched, given that this infrastructure will power large parts of the Internet of Things (IoT) market, a market that is estimated to reach $7.1 trillion by 2020.
3
Another large, exponentially growing and volatile market where derivatives could be useful is the online advertising space. Not many people know this, but large parts of display advertising slots are bought and sold in real‐time auctions using computer algorithms in fractions of a second. The technology is called “programmatic advertising” and the spot market is referred to as “real‐time bidding”. Display advertising includes the banner ads that are ubiquitous across the web, mobile, video, and social media. Buyers such as brands or media agencies input certain targeting rules for an ad campaign (travel websites or males in New York for instance) and when a user arrives at a webpage, an auction takes place to show the user a particular ad. Data such as browsing history and customer relationship management (CRM) is overlaid and releases information as to how much a buyer is willing to pay. Once the winner of the auction is chosen, the winner shows the ad to the user. This means that two users visiting the same webpage simultaneously can view two different ads, and the buyers may have paid vastly different prices to show those ads. Remember, this all takes place in about 200 milliseconds. So the infrastructure here is not unlike the high‐frequency trading infrastructure in financial markets.
Globally, this is estimated to be a $53 billion primary market by 2018
4 and although 
one may think that digital advertising budgets are still relatively small compared to 
TV budgets, the UK is the first country in the world where over half of all ad spend is on digital.
5 There is little doubt that this will be replicated throughout the world. 
Once IPTV gains traction in the future, this will add a further $79 billion to the market size by 2020.
6Our measurements, however, show that this spot market is actually 12.5 times more volatile than the S&P 500 Index. This means that a buyer of ad space (a brand or ad agency for instance), is never sure whether, firstly, they would win an auction to show an ad, and, secondly, how much they would pay for the ad. This makes planning media budgets for future campaigns extremely difficult and hurts cash flow planning too. From the point of view of a seller, such as a website or a mobile app that hosts the ads, this affects revenue.
Use cases from a website’s point of view would be to combine the futures and 
spot markets into a better yield management system. Using both futures and spot prices, they could create algorithms that allocate ad slots between the futures and spot markets in order to maximize revenue. This could be similar to how airlines manage their ticketing yields as they both share the characteristic of non‐storable inventory (ad slots shown at a particular time and seats for a particular flight).
From a hedging viewpoint, index‐based exchange traded funds could prove 
to be useful hedging tools. A seasonal website such as a travel website could hedge against future unfavourable price movements by taking a short position in a correlated index. Similarly, a buyer could hedge against potential price increases by maintaining a long position in a relevant index. Furthermore, for buyers, having a forward curve of prices could help the media planning function and aid future costs per acquisition (i.e. how many ads do I need to show to achieve n number of people purchasing my product or signing up to my 
newsletter?).
Even option contracts would be extremely useful: often when pitching to a potential 
brand for new business, an agency would love to say that it has secured certain ad slots in the pitch. In an options case, all the agency would need to pay is the upfront premium and exercise it, only if they win the pitch. From a seller’s point of view, option premiums would be another source of revenue.
Of course, there already exists a forward market in media buying. In fact, the 
forward market in media buying has existed for decades, long before the spot market came of age a few years ago. A large buyer (brand or agency) would sit down with a large print publisher or TV network and agree a deal for the forthcoming year. This “upfront” market continues to exist today in deals where personal relationships are important or where the product is customized. So 
3 IDC forecast, http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2014/08/22/internet‐of‐things‐by‐the‐
numbers‐market‐estimates‐and‐forecasts/.
4 Global Media Suppliers Advertising Revenue Forecast, September 2014, MAGNA GLOBAL.
5 eMarketer report, http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/27/half‐ad‐spend‐digital‐media.
6 Transparency Market Research report, http://www.digitaltveurope.net/318352/global‐iptv‐
market‐to‐reach‐us79‐billion‐in‐2020/.
FinTech Solu TionS129for participants in both these markets. In both the cloud IaaS and programmatic 
media markets, the technology foundations for an exchange‐based derivative market are well underway. Moreover, both already have functioning forward markets. With the standardization of contracts beginning to take place, there can be no doubt that a very large opportunity exists for FinTech companies to make their mark in these markets.this over‐the‐counter forward market will always have a place in media buying, but the majority of ad slots are conducive to being traded in an exchange environment.
The potential gross notional size of a derivative market in either the cloud IaaS or 
programmatic media markets is difficult to estimate, but there are clear use cases 
130
FinTech Solu TionS130FinTech Innovation for 
Wearables
By Dominika E. Bajer 
Director, DEB Marcomms
The growth of the wearable industry sector has been years in the making. In 2013, a 
Fortune magazine headline read “Bloomberg report estimates that Apple could see revenues of up to $3.6B with a successful smart watch”.
1 A year later Forbes was 
predicting that the “smartwatch industry will grow in 2014 to $2.5B globally. In the years to follow, the smartwatch industry will keep growing at a 3‐digit rate.”
2
In September 2014 CB Insights noted that “over the last 5 years, the wearables space has seen more than $1.4B of investment into emerging, private wearable start‐ups”, concluding in their analysis summary that “it is conceivable that 2014 might be the first year to see more than $1B of investment flowing into wearables”.
3 
In November 2014, a group of Morgan Stanley analysts wrote in a note: “Wearable devices will far surpass market expectations, and become the fastest ramping consumer technology device to date, in our view.”
And then in 2015 the NFC wearable boom exploded. Near Field Communication 
(NFC) is a short‐range wireless connectivity standard that uses magnetic field induction to enable communication between devices when they’re touched together, or brought within a few centimetres of each other. With Apple’s Smartwatch rolling out into international markets, technology giants such as Google, Sony, Microsoft, and LG putting their stamp on the wearables market, and lifestyle/fitness bands manufacturers such Jawbone, FitBit, and Misfit offering a more and more compelling product range, the wearables boom is certainly on. From week to week, wearables hold increasing media headlines for business and technology. From global companies to disruptive start‐ups – everyone seems to be competing for their share of the big wearables pie.What is All the Fuss About?
Wearable, adjective, Oxford dictionary definition: “Denoting or relating to a computer or other electronic device that is small or light enough to be worn or carried on one’s body: a wearable computer could monitor your heart rate and other bodily functions.”
4
Alternatively, it can be described as: wearable technology, wearables, fashionable technology, wearable devices, or fashion electronics. They are clothing and accessories incorporating computer and advanced electronic technologies. The designs often incorporate practical functions and features, but may also have a purely critical or aesthetic purpose.
Lifestyle bands. Smartwatches. Wearable goggles. Fitness trackers. Body wear 
cameras. Wearable orthopaedic casts. Health monitors. Virtual reality headsets. Data storage NFC rings. Festival “dog tags”. Stadium access control bands. RFID key fobs … The emerging landscape of wearable technology is as wide and unpredictable as most of the socio‐economic revolutions that have been led by technology. The scope of the current product range and the speed of new wearable solutions launched across the globe this year alone promises to change the way we run our lives, monitor our health and lifestyle, exercise, learn, play, heal and, last but not least, how and what we communicate. With the latest business analysts’ predictions of wide market adoption happening soon – the future of wearables is promising and possibilities are endless.
Wearables – A FinTech Solution?
Not so long ago, during London Technology Week 2015 someone asked me why wearables are a FinTech solution. A wearable is a tech product, no doubt, and venture capital interest in that market is a remarkable one, but where exactly do wearables fit into FinTech?
The answer is a simple one: by enabling NFC payments on wearable devices. 
Imagine being able to turn any wearable device into an alternative payment device. 
1 http://fortune.com/2013/03/04/how‐big‐might‐the‐market‐be‐for‐an‐apple‐smart‐watch/.
2 http://www.forbes.com/sites/arieladams/2014/03/07/the‐size‐of‐the‐smartwatch‐market‐its‐
key‐players/.
3 https://www.cbinsights.com/blog/wearables‐industry‐venture‐capital‐2014/.4 Oxford dictionary: http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/wearable.
FinTech Solu TionS131Imagine that on top of all the features which a favourite wearable already has we 
add the convenience of “all‐in‐one”, being able to pay. Imagine a payment device that measures heartbeat, monitors sugar levels, calculates alcohol intake, and on top of this sends out alerts as to how much you spent and what that does to your balance and savings. Imagine a world where as a consumer you do have a choice of how to pay using a globally accepted Visa, MasterCard, or American Express network with a novelty of device form – without the hassle of keeping an eye on your wallet, Wi‐Fi enabled smartphone, or heavy coins in your pockets.
NFC wearable payments are a FinTech solution. Admittedly, currently still more an 
emerging one than a fully‐fledged boom, but with constantly increasing consumer demand for ultimate convenience, a solution that is soon to become as big as market predictions. The revolution has already started: Apple Pay on Apple Watch, Jawbone’s cooperation with American Express to launch payments, Wirecard’s Payment Band proposition for the EU area, or the UK‐centric Barclaycard bPay relaunch. Not to mention the constant market gossip about handsets and fitness wearables manufacturers looking into adding contactless payment features to their existing products. Every month the financial services and banking industry is commissioning wearable‐centric proof of concepts, focused on enabling open loop payments into more and more flexible devices.
Everything You Always Wanted to 
Know About Wearables
Innovative financial services solutions are always on the verge of a hype. A decade 
ago when prepaid had more opponents that supporters, I advocated for it as an example of the endless possibilities of programmes and consumer convenience. It was the range of product offerings that provided a fresh approach to payments, the cards industry, and end‐users. Further market adoption happened thanks to transit solutions (such Oyster in London, UK) and the expansion of e‐wallets launched all across Europe. Now this is business as usual, rather than an innovative solution. In 2015, it was the Apple Pay mobile payments hype that made the industry rethink the customer approach; followed by Samsung Pay – the rest of the market will soon follow.
I spent last year monitoring the wearables tech market and became somehow 
hooked on witnessing another technology revolution, which has bigger financial and sociological potential that those just described. Wearable payments may actually change the way we perceive money, payment devices, and technology‐enabled solutions (more and more often included in the Internet of Things). Wearables seem as emerging and innovative as prepaid cards and e‐wallets were back in the day.
The “must have” global shift in the marketplace will happen on consumer demand, 
whether the industry wants that or not, as Generation Z’s quest for ultimate convenience is in full force. According to Forbes, “71% of 16‐to‐24‐year‐olds want wearable tech.”
5
I have witnessed first‐hand how many obstacles and limitations the current wearables market has to overcome to enable payments on radio‐frequency identification (RFID) devices. A complicated ecosystem and an overcomplicated value chain, which nevertheless aims to build partnerships between handsets (e.g. Samsung) or wearable hardware manufacturers (e.g. Misfit, Fitbit, Pebble, ID&C), and semiconductor manufacturers (e.g. NXP), FinTech solutions providers such as TSM companies (Gemalto, Oberhur Technologies, DigiSEq Ltd), and financial services players (including but not limited to payments networks, issuers, programme managers, and acquirers), results in a complex formula.
I could not help but conclude that to really witness the biggest consumer trend 
since the invention of mobile phones, the industry must invest in the collaboration and dialogue between parties. This year alone, wearables‐centric summits across the world show an increasing interest in engaging.
That is how the NFC Wearables Boom Everything You Always Wanted to Know 
About Wearables* (*But Were Afraid to Ask) cross‐industry knowledge sharing concept emerged. NFC wearable boom is currently present as a group forum on LinkedIn
6 and provides an industry headlines overview on PaperLi.7 In real life, 
during London Technology Week 2015, members of the FinTech and Financial Services (FS) industry met to share their views about the recent boom during a NFC 
5 By Victor Lipman. Forbes: “71% Of 16‐To‐24‐Year‐Olds Want ‘Wearable Tech.’ Why Don’t I 
Even Want To Wear A Watch?”. 22 September 2014.
6 http://linkd.in/1LMbLm6.
7 http://bit.ly/1UodXE1.132
FinTech Solu TionS132Endless Possibilities, but Within a 
Contactless Limit
The fairy tale of NFC wearable boom should be concluded only by optimistic 
statements: how it is not just a hype, but an opportunity. And it is.
The technology used in wearables is becoming more and more revolutionary and 
accessible, wearable devices are evolving into fashionable items and device unit price goes down as more and more competitors are trying to win consumers. Recent entries of budget products such Xiaomi can soon ensure a wide adoption of the mass market. Within the first six months of 2015 some of the wearable players such as GoPro and FitBit are already capitalizing on the current wearables boom.
The FinTech world is feeling increasingly excited as wearable technology blooms. 
Financial services are already counting predicted profits and what was once a niche market now seems to be the next global “must‐have” consumer trendy investment, business venture, and personal gadget.
However, payments on NFC wearables, even if they can be run via limitless 
systems and offer flexible fashionable factor possibilities, somehow will always be limited. Limited by a contactless spending limit varying from country to country and limited by a market‐by‐market acceptance network of contactless POS terminals infrastructure.
So whether NFC wearable boom will soon become an NFC payments wearable 
boom and reach $1.6 trillion global spend only the future will tell. There is, however, no doubt that in 2016 it is one of the most interesting, consumer‐centric FinTech solutions.wearable boom event organized by DigiSEq Ltd. International attendees exchanged views with SMEs who provided a comprehensive review of the current state of the industry. A showcase of wearable tech (including Misfit, Boom Pay Band, and NFC Ring) was followed by insights from both sides of the fence – FS represented by DigiSEq, Visa Collab and Carta Worldwide and NFC wearables creators – ID&C and IVS (focused on a multimillion wearables market for RFID stadiums and festival solutions), and concluded with a panel discussion Wearables – hype or opportunity? The event illustrated the old rule that collaboration is a base for all progress.
As with any innovation, for NFC wearable boom to continue and have a long‐
lasting place among FinTech solutions, there is a need for ongoing cross‐industry collaboration. More companies entering into the mix with innovative business models may offer seamless delivery and/or further the technology boom.
“The future of payment is wearable. Wearables are the new trend in the field of internet‐
based devices”
8 says Markus Braun, CEO of Wirecard AG. Wirecard prototype Pay 
Band is working as an NFC wearable payment device already. UK‐based Barclaycard decided to relaunch their bPay brand to respond to increased consumer interest. As of July 2015, customers can choose between an NFC wristband, a key fob, or a sticker – reflecting what is happening on the NFC wearables market. Devices can be linked to any account and yes, they are a little bit more expensive than standard card fees, but they are still far cheaper than lifestyle or smartwatch products, and can be used to pay anywhere that the contactless symbol appears. Another UK‐based company, DigiSEq, has the mission to make today’s innovations part of tomorrow’s daily use. DigiSEq can enable payments on any RFID device.
There are more and more market players looking into NFC wearables and it is 
only a matter of time before we recognize real industry influencers who will shape payments on remote RFID products.
8 Wirecard: https://www.wirecard.com/newsroom/press‐releases/newsdetail/wirecard‐presents‐
first‐payment‐wearable‐on‐hce‐basis/.
FinTech Solu TionS133Capital and 
Investment6This part of the book is focused on capital raising options for FinTech 
businesses and investment trends for retail and professional investors. We review the finance ladder from start-up financing through to growth capital, private equity, and exits/IPOs and discuss the importance of building an investable platform. You will learn about angel investing and why it is important to attract smart money while also sharing the many benefits of being an angel investor. We will outline the growth of crowdfunding and marketplace lending as a leading FinTech sector and look into the future of wealth management, deep diving into the robo-advisory space and business models.
You will gain insight into the latest technologies which facilitate 
higher investment performance by collecting and leveraging the knowledge of the crowd, including how a crowdsourced hedge fund could operate. Finally, we widen the perspective and look at underlying opportunities and challenges within the investment sector and the power of governments to create frameworks supporting both fundraising and the (Fin)Tech sector globally.Investment and Capital – Back 
to Basics
By Richard Goold 
Head of Tech Law, EY (UK & Ireland)
In this chapter, we will look at:1.
 The “finance ladder”: the complete corporate finance process from start‐up 
financing through to growth capital, private equity, and exits/IPOs; and
2. Building an investable platform – key legal, accounting, and tax issues that all founder teams should be aware of.
The Finance Ladder
I will consider the lifecycle of a FinTech company by looking at the financing options and stage‐posts of a high‐growth trajectory:
•	What is meant by venture capital, growth capital, and expansion capital? What 
are the differences and the fundamental aspects of each type of financing?
•	When might private equity come into play?
•	What are the advantages and disadvantages of taking a FinTech company public?
Venture Capital – The Basics
Venture capital describes the more risky forms of equity investment that investors can make in companies (the “venture” gives the clue away). However, many of the mechanics used by venture capitalists (VCs) are designed to de‐risk the investment from an investor’s perspective. Before we dig deeper into those protections, I will describe in a little more detail the various stages of venture capital in today’s FinTech ecosystem.
Often companies start their capital raising journey by either bootstrapping (eking 
out an existence without raising capital) or raising the bare minimum to get going –  this is normally called a “friends and family round”, which is descriptive of the typical sources of that initial capital.This would then be followed by an angel round, which may lead to a seed round, although the two terms are being used almost interchangeably now. Typically a seed round is a round of investment of generally up to £1 million. Seed round investors are often high‐net‐worth angel investors, although we are beginning to witness an increase of the US phenomenon of institution‐led seed rounds. At this stage of a company’s development, this investment is the most risky money – there may be little more than a team and an idea, with the seed capital being used to develop the product. Seed rounds normally have investor protections such as warranties, restrictive covenants, and certain other covenants on the company but investors normally do not expect the heavier style of institutional protections that a VC would require. This cuts down on the legal process and therefore the cost of raising money.
An A round (generally in the £1m–£7m region currently, but they are getting larger) 
will often be led by an institutional VC and the terms would be more protective and extensive than an angel would push for.
1 The model documents contain a term sheet, 
a shareholders’ agreement, and a set of articles of association. They are not for the faint‐hearted (the shareholders agreement alone runs to over 60 pages) and are complex by necessity, as the protections that VCs insist upon to guard them (in down rounds and in the event that the company becomes insolvent) are multi‐layered.
In essence, VCs generally want their money back in case the company becomes 
insolvent (“a liquidation preference”) and to have comfort that if money is going to go into the company in the future at a lower valuation than that at which they are investing, they will get recompense (through an “anti‐dilution protection”).
Other key elements are:
•	Warranties
These are contractual promises from the company (and possibly the founders) as to the state of the legal, tax, and financial affairs of the company;
•	Restrictive covenantsThese are covenants from the founders that they will not compete with the company or do other things to harm the company’s business; and
1 Those of us that have been involved in the investment community for some time have been 
part of an initiative in conjunction with the British Venture Capital Association to pull in the 
parameters of negotiation for such processes and a set of model documents can be found at http://www.venturecentral.co.uk/model‐documents/4585713181.138
CaPital and invest Ment138•	Covenants
These are both found in the positive (e.g. management agreeing to do certain things, such as provide information to the investors) and in the negative (e.g. management agreeing not to do certain things, such as deviate from the agreed business plan).
B Rounds and Beyond
B rounds, C rounds, and beyond are often described as “expansion capital”. By the time that a company has moved on through a successful A round, hopefully the technology is gaining some serious traction, customers are being won over week‐on‐week, and it is time to scale up the workforce – particularly the salesforce. That is where expansion capital comes into play. Expansion capital is a competitive space for the VCs and by the time a company is profitable and ready to expand, it is time to be picky and choose the investor with the right network and the right experience for you.
Growth Capital
Growth capital is sometimes used interchangeably with expansion capital but in the UK it is more typically put into less risky companies that are already profitable and that have not been through extensive rounds of institutional venture capital.
Private Equity
Private equity can be found in several different scenarios, but most commonly it is an alternative to a trade sale and it is capital that is used to buy out the existing owners (replace those owners who may also be directors with a new tier of management). The private equity house will then incentivize those managers to grow the company through equity.
Different forms of management buyouts using private equity are as follows:a.
 MBO – management buyout – when the existing second‐tier management utilize 
private equity to buy out the existing top‐level management;
b. MBI – management buy‐in – when new management of the business come on board at the same time as the incoming private equity investor to replace the old management entirely; and
c.
 BIMBO – buy‐in management buyout – a hybrid of the above where some existing management may stay along with new management coming in.When to Go Public?
In the last five years, capital markets have not been operating in Europe as well as any of us would have liked, but the public investor appetite for FinTech has increased hugely, and with the alternative investment market (AIM), the new high‐growth segment on the London Stock Exchange and the main market itself loosening up, public markets are certainly a consideration for companies. Whilst many FinTech companies are not quite ready to go public just yet, I think that we will see a significant number of FinTech IPOs over the next five years.
The public markets are of particular interest to companies that have any level of 
consumer facing element to them – if brand awareness can be raised through an IPO and that can be linked to raising capital and creating an exit event for some of the earlier‐stage investors (without the founders losing control of the company), an IPO can be a win‐win for the company, management, and the investors.
Entrepreneurs beware, though: the life of a public company CEO, with all the 
investor roadshows and corporate governance to consider, is certainly not for everyone. Those that like the closed boardroom, the more nimble touch of a smaller board with less governance, often prefer to raise capital privately (to build towards a trade sale).
Building an Investable Platform
Having the best idea in the world does not mean that you will build the best company in the world. The rule of law, tax bear‐traps to avoid, and key accounting issues all need to be slotted together to create an investable platform.
The frenetic pace of a FinTech start‐up means the tax position of the company 
and founders can easily be overlooked. Getting the paperwork right at the outset is so important. Part of that is getting the right team of advisors involved, but all management teams need to be aware of the key accounting, legal, and tax issues that institutional investors will want to see in place before they invest.
Beware of the Taxman
On an exit which delivers the returns FinTech entrepreneurs are likely to be hoping for, having your house in order from day one can mean, at least here in the UK, the difference between a 10% tax bill and a tax bill in excess of 45%. Not only that, but 
CaPital and invest Ment139is called a section 431 election to make sure all the exit proceeds are subject to 
capital gains tax and not income tax.
Management Share Options
If things go well, then the founder team may want to bring in and incentivize fresh talent. Issuing free shares to the management team would give rise to income tax on the value of the shares when they join and they probably will not have the money to pay for the shares. Much better to give them EMI share options which have a market value strike price. EMI stands for “enterprise management incentives”, a share option arrangement specifically designed to provide a powerful tool for the recruitment and reward of employees in growth companies. They are turbo‐charged from a tax viewpoint: there is no tax up front and no tax when the options are exchanged for shares, and provided that a year has passed since the employee was given the EMI options, only 10% tax when the shares are eventually sold.the tax bill will come at the end, rather than as a nasty surprise at an earlier stage in the growth cycle. The name of the game is to ensure that all of the upside is treated as a capital gain rather than income, which is taxed more punitively.
Founder Shares
The starting point is for the founders of the business to incorporate a company and issue shares to themselves in the agreed allocations at the outset. The share issue will require a minuted board meeting, the issue of share certificates, and most importantly entering the founders’ names in the company’s shareholders’ register. A situation to avoid is leaving these formalities until the first investment round. By then, the company will have value, which means that the taxman may say that he wants income tax on the value of the shares issued to the founders because they are employees. That is money that does not yet exist, of course. Depending on the rights which the shares have, it may be necessary for the founders to sign what 140
CaPital and invest Ment140Angel Investing – Access to 
“Smart Money” to Fund the Best FinTech Companies
By Susanne Chishti 
CEO & Founder, FINTECH Circle; Chairwoman, FINTECH Circle Innovate
The “angel round” is normally the first external funding round to inject cash into a 
FinTech start-up by accredited, high-net worth (HNW) investors. Most great tech success stories were backed by fantastic angel investors who really believed in the team and their vision and helped to make it work. Thus each FinTech firm needs great FinTech angels backing them up all the way. This chapter helps finance and technology leaders to find out how they can personally benefit by becoming FinTech angel investors.
So how can you personally benefit from the enormous growth of the FinTech sector? 
The two main options are to either become an entrepreneur trying to build the next FinTech success story or to become a FinTech angel investor. As an angel investor you invest your personal funds to help the best FinTech entrepreneurs build their business in order to sell it or go public many years later to make a good return. The most valuable companies of tomorrow’s finance sector are being formed today and if you only invest via the stock market into publicly listed stocks and funds, these opportunities will not be available to you. Private investors can be part of the journey from the beginning by providing much needed capital to the best start‐ups and small and medium‐sized enterprises (SMEs).
David S. Rose, founder of New York Angels, summarized it so well by providing 
the following example: “This form of investment can be extraordinarily lucrative. When Ben Silberman approached New York Angels in April 2009, seeking a small investment in his interactive mobile catalog idea, he valued his company at $2.5 million. Today, just over four years later [2013], Pinterest is valued at $3.8 billion – an increase of 152,000 percent.”
1 So angel investors who backed the initial funding 
round have done extremely well. In 2015 Pinterest Inc. raised $367 million, giving the online site a valuation of $11 billion and making it one of the most highly valued start‐ups by venture capitalists in the world.
2
So how can you get involved, how can you become an angel investor? Two key principles should apply – first only invest in what you know and secondly, only invest the money you can afford to lose. Similarly to crowdfunding, there is no guarantee that you will get your investment back. HNW investors often use an asset allocation strategy when building their investment portfolios which might consist of a core portfolio of passive investments (for example exchange traded funds) in combination with a range of satellite investments such as property, hedge funds, private equity, and commodities. The key thing is to never put all your eggs in one basket
  –  a lesson we have all heard before.
So where does angel investment fit in? What differentiates successful angel investors from the rest is their passion for a certain industry because of their previous experience and skills. Often this passion and deep domain expertise drives and empowers them to pick the winners. Post investment smart angels like to play an active role in the success of the company by doing anything in their power to help the company grow. That is why all FinTech entrepreneurs need their angels!
FinTech angels often come from the financial services and/or technology sectors 
combining deep domain expertise in retail, corporate, investment banking, asset management, private wealth management, or transaction banking with technology understanding and the curiosity to explore new technologies such as blockchain innovation, for example.
So where do angel investors make the best returns? Very few statistics exist and 
many are outdated. However one recent survey of business angels was published in the UK, featuring responses from 403 angels, and drawing data from angel syndicates and networks comprising 8,000 individual investors, entitled “A Nation of Angels” which shared the details of their best‐ and worst‐performing investments.
3 
1 David S. Rose, Angel Investing – The Gust Guide to Making Money & Having Fun Investing in 
Startups (John Wiley & Sons, 2014).2 Wall Street Journal, Article written by Yoree Koh on 16 March 2015, http://www.wsj.com/
articles/pinterest‐raises‐367‐million‐at‐11‐billion‐valuation‐1426538379.
3 “A Nation of Angels, Assessing the Impact of Angel Investing across the UK”, Enter-
prise Research Center, January 2015, http://www.enterpriseresearch.ac.uk/wp‐content/
uploads/2015/01/ERC‐Angels‐Report.pdf.
CaPital and invest Ment141Financial technology came out on top with FinTech as the most lucrative sector for 
angel investment, delivering the highest growth compared to any other industry.
The report also found that these early‐stage investors are getting younger in the 
UK, more female, and are increasingly likely to back companies outside their local area. In 2008, the median age of a UK angel investor was 53. In 2015, 44% of UK angel investors are under 45 years, and almost three‐quarters are under 54. The proportion of female angels stands at 14%, up from just 7% in 2008. The rise of women‐only angel networks has helped the gender gap to narrow slightly, but the UK still lags behind the US where 20% of angels are female. Thus the FinTech sector needs more angel investors and more female angels to join to ensure that the best companies get funded.
So how do you become an angel investor? What are the key areas you should be 
aware of when starting to invest?
•	Diversification is king.
Among private investors and VCs it is often expected that at least half of their investments will fail, thus out of 10 investments, you would assume that at least five will fail, three to four might return the original investment, and one will be the big winner, where the exit will be so extraordinary that it compensates for all losses. Thus you rely on 10% of your portfolio generating enough return, so that the overall portfolio return is attractive.
The problem for investors is that nobody knows who the winners will be and 
therefore investing in early stage companies is a numbers game. David Rose summarized it in this way: “Several studies and mathematical simulations have shown that it takes investing the same amount of money consistently in at least 20 to 25 companies before your returns begin to approach the typical return of over 20% [per year] for professional, active angel investors.”
4
•	Understand the investment lifecycle/finance ladder of a start‐up.Angel investment normally comes after the friends and family round and before VC funding and is normally focused on amounts between £100,000 and £1 million. However, these lines are blurring as we have seen with FINTECH Circle, Europe’s first angel network exclusively focused on FinTech opportunities, where we co‐invested with early stage VCs during 2015. You also need to be aware that every successful company will need more money to grow and your stake will be diluted unless you are able to join the follow‐on rounds.
•	Dealflow is key to identifying high‐potential opportunities.The better your dealflow, the more likely it is that you will pick a winner. Therefore the best strategy is to align with like‐minded investors and become well known in the marketplace so that the best FinTech companies approach you before approaching others. Most frequently angel investors join syndicates where angels combine their knowledge and expertise in evaluating companies and then co‐invest together. Without great dealflow, you could be the best stock picker but it would not help because the opportunities you see are limited.
•	Top angels will provide “smart money”.When companies start to grow they not only need money, but mentors/advisors (whose interests are aligned with the founders) to help them grow their business. This help could mean introducing them to your contacts and network of potential partners and customers. It could mean helping them to validate important business assumptions, providing resources (to which they would not otherwise have access) or helping them with their value proposition and business model to achieve product/market fit. Being an angel is such an opportunity to be both an investor and mentor/supporter of the start‐ups you have backed. You are on their side and they know it.
•	Angel investing is personal.As an investor you need to back the founding team wholeheartedly, which normally means you must like them, trust them, and believe in them to execute their plans. You will want to spend time and energy with the FinTech firms you back to understand their backgrounds and if they have what it takes to succeed. Angel investing takes time to build the rapport on both sides as it is equally important for the entrepreneurs to feel comfortable with their investors. A well‐known FinTech entrepreneur once told me that he does not take on investors whom he does not enjoy going to lunch with. That makes perfect sense – being invested as a private investor is like a marriage which neither you nor the entrepreneur can leave easily.
4 David S. Rose, Angel Investing – The Gust Guide to Making Money & Having Fun Investing in 
Startups (John Wiley & Sons, 2014).142
CaPital and invest Ment142The negotiating process is again an opportunity to go into more details on company 
leadership, and discuss important questions in terms of control and decision‐making, including the protection for minority shareholders, all summarized in the important “shareholders’ agreement”. In addition there will be other documents to sign depending on which country you are based in, a process which can be very complex and tiring for the FinTech entrepreneurs who are always relieved when the fundraising process is over as it is a distraction to their business.
After the investment the key objective of smart angels is to add value to their 
FinTech firms. Assuming that you are an angel investor with great domain expertise in some of the verticals across financial services such as retail, corporate or investment banking, asset management, private wealth management, transaction banking/payments, or crypto‐currencies/blockchain technologies, your contacts and previous experience will be extremely valuable to the founders and you should try to help them wherever you can.
Finally, a very important benefit of angel investing is non‐monetary – being an active 
angel is fun. It can be very rewarding to meet inspiring entrepreneurs, mentor and coach them, actively participate in their journey, feel the excitement when things go well, and try to find solutions when challenges occur. Creating your FinTech portfolio of angel investments will be an amazing experience. It is entrepreneurship without the responsibility and helps you keep up with the latest disruptive technologies and trends and it is satisfying to be able to give back. Thus there is definitely a social side to angel investing. For those investors who want to invest in FinTech start‐ups but have no time to be active angels or might not be permitted to pick their own investments (as there might be a conflict of interest with their day jobs), specialized funds exist which focus on investments into FinTech companies.
FINTECH Circle angels attend great start‐up and educational events, are invited 
to mentor the best FinTech entrepreneurs, and are intellectually challenged and stimulated which helps to see the future of finance and personally benefit from the FinTech revolution. You and your angel network can fund the best FinTech start‐ups, laying the foundations for their future success!•	Evaluate their pitch, presentation and technology.Key documents investors often look at are executive summaries (that’s an important document because if that does not sell the opportunity, the investor will not look further), investor decks, business plans, or financial forecasts. Thus it is key to spend time preparing the investor deck well and also to make it visually appealing. First impressions count on paper, online, and in person. In order to assess the proposed tech solution, angels will leverage their own expertise and network of relevant industry contacts.
Now let us assume you have found a great FinTech company at an Angel Network Event, met the founders in person, really liked them and their product, discussed their pitch with other FinTech angels who also want to back it in the form of a very complementary angel syndicate (in terms of combined expertise and available networks across financial services and technology), and now you want to take it further. This next phase is called “due diligence”, where it is key to explore the details of the management team, the products/services and traction to date, the market size and opportunities for global expansion, route to market strategies, competitive advantage, and exit options. Due diligence can be done together or one angel can take the lead.
The difficult next step is agreeing on a valuation. Normally FinTech firms will have 
an idea about their valuation and about how much money they are looking for. This will normally be part of the pitch deck made available to angel investors. However valuations are never set in stone and can be negotiated taking into account:
•	Competitive metrics, i.e. what are other FinTech firms worth in this vertical at this 
development stage?
•	What are the growth and valuation expectations for the company in the future?
•	How much can you afford to invest taking into account that you want to build up a diversified angel portfolio of companies and what equity stake would you like in return?
This is obviously not a complete list as books have been written on the topic of valuation, which is a difficult combination of science and art especially for start‐ups.
CaPital and invest Ment143Crowdfunding and Marketplace 
(P2P) Lending – Online Capital Marketplaces as New Asset Classes to Access Funding
By Brian W. Tang 
Managing Director, Asia Capital Markets Institute (ACMI)
Online capital marketplaces are FinTech platforms that facilitate fundraising by 
accessing “other people’s money”.
In relation to this category of internet finance, equity crowdfunding portals are 
disrupting the venture capital (VC) market by enabling investments directly into private company start‐ups, and peer‐to‐peer (P2P) lending platforms are disrupting the banking market by facilitating lending to small and medium‐sized enterprises (SMEs). This new mode of capital pooling and securitization is currently also being expanded into areas such as invoice trading and real estate investment. On their face, these kinds of investments can provide opportunities for individuals and asset owners and managers to make potentially uncorrelated portfolio allocations. Concurrently, this form of alternative finance allows originators to syndicate balance sheet risk exposures, and risk‐taking SMEs and entrepreneurs, including other FinTech companies, to fund innovation and create jobs.
The growth potential is tremendous. Goldman Sachs’ 2015 report entitled 
Socialization of Finance called crowdfunding “potentially the most disruptive of all the new models of finance”. The World Bank estimates that crowdfunding investments in developing countries alone could reach US$96 billion a year by 2025. Venture capital firm Foundation Capital, whose portfolio includes a stake in Lending Club which staged 2014’s largest US tech IPO, asserts that marketplace lending is a US$1 trillion market.
It is, therefore, not surprising that debates have already begun regarding whether 
such online capital marketplaces are creating new investment asset classes. But does the sector have the critical ingredients to create one or more sustainable asset classes?Disclosure Paradigm as the Basis 
of Modern Global Capital Markets
Key to the integrity of all capital marketplaces and exchanges that seek to tap “other 
people’s money” is the requisite trust in the quality of the fundraiser’s transparency/disclosure and independent gatekeeper due diligence/credit rating analysis.
In the lead up to the creation of the US Securities Act of 1933 and Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934, upon which the regulation of modern capital markets globally is based, US Supreme Court Justice Louis D. Brandeis famously quipped: “Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants; electric light the most efficient policeman.”
The principle behind the Disclosure Paradigm is fairly straightforward: limited 
liability corporations were historically created to seek “other people’s money” for high‐risk and high‐growth enterprises (such as merchant expeditions to the Orient) when traditional lenders were unwilling to extend credit. In return for a proportionate share of the profits, capital raisers were obliged to periodically disclose all material information relating to their financial condition and operating performance to enable investors to make their investment decisions to buy, sell, hold, and price such securities. Such disclosure should be complete and should not be misleading nor contain material omissions.
On this basis, first moneyed families, and then institutional investors followed the 
advent of the pension system and insurance policies, and eventually more ordinary “moms and pops”, could invest and trade, directly or indirectly, in these securities. These new asset classes included investments in shares of public companies listed on stock exchanges, in sovereign and corporate bonds, as well as in private companies through VC and private equity firms.
The Disclosure Paradigm has proven to be a relatively cost‐effective investor 
protection policy mechanism. It implicitly relies upon the critical judgment of capital markets professionals regarding what information is material that should be disclosed to different classes of investors, depending on their assumed levels of financial sophistication. Platforms tapping retail investors thus need more disclosure and investment protection than institutional and accredited investors. Enforcement regarding any deficiencies is effected through regulatory action and/or private litigation, depending on the jurisdiction.144
CaPital and invest Ment144Accordingly, the professionalism of capital market gatekeepers both external (such as 
stock exchanges, investment bankers, lawyers, auditors, and credit ratings agencies) and internal (directors and officers such as CEOs, CFOs, company secretaries, general counsel, and investor relations), as well as adequate investor financial literacy, are imperative to the efficient functioning and integrity of our global capital markets.
The Global Financial Crisis’ 
Aftermath of Regulations, Penalties, and Loss of Trust
The 2008 global financial crisis, triggered by factors including a widespread 
mis‐selling of sub‐prime mortgage‐backed securities, resulted in an initial wave of prudential regulation focused on systemic risk, financial stability, and capital levels to address financial institutions that were deemed “too big to fail”. A tsunami of legislation and regulation followed. For example, the US Dodd‐Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act consisted of a record‐breaking 849 pages and 396 rule‐making requirements that Brown Brothers Harriman has estimated will total more than 25,000 pages when completed. In March 2014, US Attorney‐General Eric Holder clarified that “[t]here is no such thing as too big to jail”. Since then, several global banks have been prosecuted and pleaded guilty to criminal charges such as tax evasion, US sanction violations, and currency market manipulation. Based on CCP Research Foundation research, bank conduct risk costs (including provisions) for 2010–2014 have risen to more than £200 billion, with charges including misconduct, mis‐selling, and fraud. At the same time, securities regulators are increasingly focused on ensuring effective disclosure by communicating with and enlightening investors in plain language, rather than obfuscating risks with voluminous boilerplate and repetitive language that arises from a tick‐the‐box “mere compliance” mentality.
Conduct Risk as a New Core 
Focus of Financial Regulation and Supervision
In the wake of the Libor interest rate manipulation scandal, the UK Joint 
Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards published its 2013 report, Changing Banking for Good. Around the world, the high‐level focus of central bankers and securities regulators, ranging from the UK Financial Conduct Authority and US Federal Reserve Bank to the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission, has shifted to cultural and ethical aspects of financial institutions to address the perceived “ethical drift” that gave rise to the increased conduct risk. Regulators now expect greater management and individual accountability for misconduct.
Proposals for industry‐wide codes of conduct are gathering steam, such as 
the Netherlands requiring banker oaths and the Fixed Income Currency and Commodities (FICC) Market Standards Board proposed in the Bank of England’s recent Fair and Effective Markets Review. Voluntary initiatives abound, including the Australian Banking and Finance Oath initiative, the UK Banking Standards Board, and the Malaysian Financial Services Professional Board. The Harvard student‐originated MBA Oath initiative demonstrates the importance placed by millennials on pursuing careers with purpose and positive contribution. Yet the greatest challenge ahead lies in “bringing to life” and operationalizing such codes and oaths to promote professionalism in the service of clients and as part of society.
Trust and Regulating Rapidly 
Evolving Online Capital Marketplaces
Proponents of crowdfunding, marketplace lending, and other new fundraising 
platform business models must similarly be willing and able to exude a level of trustworthiness in their processes and standards. This is especially true at a time when their legal status may be murky. Otherwise, crises will arise and distrust in the emerging industry could result in forms of investor protection regulation that may excessively hinder the nascent growth of the sector. And this requirement to exude trust applies to the platforms themselves as well as the emerging ecosystem actors.
In the meantime, developments are rapid as this space evolves quickly. In the UK 
and US, the ongoing low interest rate environment has led to institutional investors becoming the dominant marketplace lenders. At the same time, the “private IPO” market has seen explosive growth with unicorn companies of US$1 billion plus  pre‐IPO valuations reportedly exceeding the value of all VC‐backed tech IPOs in the year to date – this demonstrates the tremendous interest in being able to invest in private companies that could be the next Google or Facebook.
CaPital and invest Ment145formation: professional identity, analytical skills, and practical know‐how. In relation 
to the capital markets, this means cultivating participants’ core values and roles in dealing with “other people’s money” and financing real economy growth. It also means honing professional skills in giving voice to such values in the face of organizational dynamics, competitive pressures, and complexity in addressing systemic information asymmetry.
Policy‐makers and industry participants will and should continue to debate the 
extent to which retail participation in online capital marketplaces should be expanded beyond accredited and professional investors. Different approaches will emerge, as can be seen from Malaysia’s annual cap on each individual’s crowdfunding participation to the US JOBS Act’s licensing of crowdfunding portals. The Australian Securities and Investment Commission’s recent creation of an innovation hub is a great idea to allow for ongoing stakeholder dialogue and small‐scale piloting of new business models. The industry can also benefit from practice guidelines that are not mere checklists for minimum disclosure. Ultimately, quality capital markets rely on quality due diligence and quality disclosure.
FinTechnologist professionalism and investor education of this new form of 
investment and its risks are essential to gain consumer confidence and avoid costly over‐regulation and prosecutions. This has been recognized by various industry initiatives such as the European Crowdfunding Network’s recently updated Code of Conduct for platforms and new Charter of Crowdfunding Rights for users.
More can and should be done. Only then may online capital marketplaces live up 
to their promise of facilitating new and sustainable investment asset classes that benefit investors and entrepreneurs alike, and to cost‐effectively fuel innovation and real economy growth to serve our broader society.Perhaps ironically, online capital marketplaces have achieved greater levels of democratization in retail investor participation in countries such as China, which according to Wangdaizhijia had at least over 1,500 P2P platforms operating at the end of last year. Some of the reasons for this include their competitive offerings compared with state‐owned bank incumbents, and a high mobile broadband penetration that helped create a strong culture of online transactions via internet giants Alibaba and Tencent. The tremendous rise of the Chinese A‐share stock market since the end of last year has also excited entrepreneurs and individual investors alike in relation to the fundraising and rapid wealth creation possibilities that capital marketplaces can provide.
However, the bubbles of today can lead to herd mentality, mispricing of risk, an 
increase in the number of speculators, a decline in asset quality of offerings, and pressures to cut corners. That, in turn, can lead to the tears of tomorrow.
Professional Education for 
Advancement of the Online Capital Marketplace Ecosystem
According to Edelman’s 2015 TrustBarometer, financial services remain the 
least trusted industry globally. It is this loss of public trust that has in fact helped FinTech to emerge and quickly gain traction over the past few years. A critical lesson internet finance participants should also learn from the progression of financial services’ regulatory focus is the importance of reputation and reinforcing professionalism as a self‐regulatory mechanism to help gain the trust of both consumers and regulators. Academic research from the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching identifies three critical elements in professional 146
CaPital and invest Ment146The Digital Investment Space – 
Spanning from Social Trading to Digital Private Banking – A FinTech Sector Made for Disruption?
By Michael Mellinghoff 
Managing Director, TechFluence
In the mid-1990s the mutual fund industry introduced distribution fees to reward 
their distribution partners for promoting their own mutual funds to private investors. The reduction in margin for mutual fund providers was immense. A fund which at that time charged a management fee of 1% suddenly had to pay on a recurring basis half of the management fee to the distributor, who sold the fund to the client. This decreased the margin of the product provider by at least half. This marked the starting point of a negative market development for product manufacturers, and especially investors in these products, in favour of product distributors. Clients over time paid the bill via higher management fees, as product manufacturers increased their management fees, and thus charged even higher distribution fees, since the fee level very often was expressed as a percentage of the management fee of the investment fund: a vicious circle decreasing the yield of the investor and increasing the profit of the industry.
These high profit margins are one of the reasons why digital competitors entered 
the field of wealth and asset management and why they have a chance to capture enough market share to survive even fierce future competition between the traditional and the digital world, which will most likely lead to an overall reduction of fees. Moreover, decades of underperformance by active mutual funds have led to a massive outflow from the category to the benefit of low‐cost passive and ETF options as well as alternative asset classes and instruments. At the same time, client demand changes rapidly as the very low interest rates across the globe foster the need of savers and investors to act more proactively than in the past, i.e. take higher risks and invest more than previously or start investing in risk‐bearing asset classes.Furthermore, technology in the past few years has enabled retail clients to become more and more independent from their product advisors in banks or advisory firms. Clients simply start applying their digital behaviour from the e‐commerce sector to their financial needs and thus are open to digital financial offers. These digital behaviours changed more quickly than banks could adapt their services offer, especially because post financial crisis they had to focus on saving the industry by adapting to a new regulatory regime rather than keeping up to date regarding their digital offerings. Digital challengers have jumped onto the opportunity and the early movers among the FinTech start‐ups have attracted substantial attention because of this, and continue to drive the change in the FinTech sector, which is complex by definition, as the regulatory environment is more demanding than in other sectors.
Extrapolating these trends, it is fair to assume that available assets are going 
to increase for digital challengers and thus increase the margin pressure for traditional players that will be forced to cut costs and re‐focus their business models. The first digital challengers to traditional players in the field of digital investment were social trading companies and companies offering automated investment advisory services (“robo advisors”) both focusing on retail investors. The first market entrants in the robo advisory field innovated by business model and did not compete over price. As robo advisory enables all market participants to compete for the private client, many players in the financial universe will tap the market of automated investment advice: banks, online brokers, asset managers etc. will start offering robo advisory services for free. The US market unsurprisingly started to move first into this direction as Charles Schwab counters Wealthfront’s successful market entry by offering robo advice for free. Similar developments are now being witnessed in other markets, for example in Germany where ebase, a subsidiary of Commerzbank, entered into the robo advisory business in July 2015. A question mark for the moment remains, whether non‐financial players will enter the automated advisory space, as they did successfully in other areas, for example the supermarket banks in the UK like Tesco Bank, M&S Bank, or Harrods’ Bank. These developments are likely to result in reduced margins in the retail space and traditional players will focus their activities on more complex areas of the market (for example, private banking), which will foster competition here and lead to a market concentration in this part of the market over time, too.
The more robo advisory models mushroom – white‐label versions are already 
available for example from start‐ups in Germany – the more different algorithms 
CaPital and invest Ment147will be competing in future and will align over time. The independent robo advisory 
providers are forced to continue striving for innovation and will over time offer more connected services like a concept that can be labelled as the “talking portfolio”. The Internet of Things will create completely new business models and markets in all aspects of our current lifestyle. Money matters are not excluded from this. For example, self‐driving cars, plus the Internet of Things, plus insurance will in the future allow a bunch of tailored solutions in the InsuranceTech space.
The Internet of Things will also have an impact on our savings and investment 
culture. The investment world will see similar developments as the insurance world: why should only petrol stations and hotels be shown on Google Maps? Why not the next available (human) investment advisor? Why should a navigation system in a rental car not offer the option to choose a portfolio‐optimized route? Such a service would provide information on companies that are directly or indirectly linked to the current portfolio holdings of the investor: only Royal Dutch Shell gas stations, no other fast food locations than Starbucks would be displayed, and of course respective vouchers would be given to shareholders first, etc. As self‐driving cars are connected to fridges and other household appliances, the “driver” has time to consider decisions about whether today he would like to optimize his daily household spending on optimization of his short‐term trading portfolio, or instead the long‐term investment portfolio. Based on the global real time and projected drive thru waiting times at McDonald’s, the portfolio itself will issue buy or sell recommendations on McDonald’s stock. Also the connected fridge or freezer will have a button to order portfolio‐optimized food only, telling you every morning that if you and all other users of this service use this service, the joint financial gain will be “x” % p.a. on invested capital. The portfolio holdings and its expected return will be automatically readjusted based on the aggregate buying activity of all connected smart fridges. Such a trend could result in the formation of special interest groups/communities based around investment styles. Analysis of investors’ private and business lifestyle through smart appliances will certainly result in buy or sell recommendations for certain asset classes or securities.
While these developments seem like fiction today, we currently see only the 
beginning of robo advisory structures that enable start‐up companies to enter a high margin business. In the US robo advisors are mushrooming already. Techfluence assumes the number of automated advisory services to at least rise tenfold globally in the next few years. Advisory services become a commodity. More sophisticated tools, which allow investors for example to exclude certain product providers from the portfolio or single asset classes or even single stocks, will be able to offer this as a fee‐generating premium service, which can be paid in fiat currency or social currency, i.e. personal data sharing models.
The traditional competition among portfolio managers on the best (risk‐adjusted) 
performance will at least partially be replaced by competition of the best algorithms of the automated analysis providers. The technological developments thus impact all parts of the value chain of wealth management. Successful sophisticated investment algorithms will also be offered through B2B channels as robo advisory with a human touch. UBS is already using smart data verified by client advisors to optimize portfolio returns. As more social trading platforms emerge and grow more user profiles, advisory services – online and human – will be added to the platforms, helping investors to select the best user mix in their social trading portfolio.
As robo advisory services entered the market only recently, especially in the next 
few years, there is going to be direct competition between automated advisory and human advisory services, be they branch‐based or online. Over time, this will lead to hybrid models as it is fair to assume that the growing complexity of algorithms will lead to the need for human support, thus creating new job opportunities, too. The investment advisor of the future does not pick stocks or asset classes on behalf of the client but consults on algorithms or even helps tailor them.
In summary, the FinTech industry is set to disrupt the digital investment area as 
a whole, starting with B2C business models, with B2B to follow soon. The whole value chain of wealth management will be under tremendous pressure to change and adapt. The new competitors have the ability and agility to offer products and services digitally and the successful players will continue to innovate. The Internet of Things and wearables will boost this development. Traditional players should use their grace period as they still earn high recurring fees from the past by investing these wisely and try to compete with the new FinTech players and actively seek collaboration with tech companies.148
CaPital and invest Ment148Leading the Way with an 
Investor‐led Approach to Crowdfunding
By Christopher Smith 
Former Content Editor, SyndicateRoom
In June 2015, the word “crowdfunding” was added to the Oxford English Dictionary 
along with the verb “to crowdfund” and the adjective “crowdfunded”. So does its inclusion in a dictionary mean that crowdfunding has become mainstream and that it is no longer part of the alternative finance market? The answer is: not yet.
Crowdfunding is still a relatively novel funding concept. Globally, it is growing 
rapidly, but it is also diverse and in constant evolution. Moreover, its development and growth vary from country to country, depending on local regulatory, economic, and social factors amongst others. Awareness of crowdfunding, in comparison to the established financing market, is still low and there are some critical challenges – in particular around education, transparency, and the protection of investors. These issues need to be addressed before crowdfunding can reach its full potential.
The term “crowdfunding” can mean different things to different people, as there 
are a number of diverse models. Broadly speaking, they divide into those which do not provide a financial return (donation‐based or reward‐based models, such as Kickstarter) and those whose goal is to provide a financial return (equity‐based platforms such as Companisto and SyndicateRoom, or lending‐based platforms such as Funding Circle).
Of the different models, the most complex is undoubtedly equity crowdfunding 
which sees investors receive shares in the company in return for their investment. Much of the complexity is due to the regulatory aspects of this type of financing.
In the United States, legal barriers have slowed the development of equity 
crowdfunding, although this is changing since the new Regulation A+ rules came into effect in 2015. Companies can now secure funding via equity crowdfunding, provided they comply with a set of specific laws and standards.In the case of Europe though, the rapidly increasing popularity of equity crowdfunding has caught many by surprise – especially the regulators. Equity crowdfunding is more advanced here than in other regions of the world. However, the market is highly deregulated and there is a patchwork of different national legal frameworks.
A review published in December 2014 by the European Crowdfunding Network 
states: “We are still far from a harmonised single market for crowdfunding, maybe even further than last year.”
1 Instead, an increasing number of EU countries are 
implementing specific national crowdfunding regulations of their own. The top three European crowdfunding markets have each gone to different lengths to facilitate crowdfunding. In France, the government has been strongly supportive of crowdfunding, and introduced rules and regulations for both peer‐to‐peer lending and equity crowdfunding in October 2014. These are aimed first and foremost at protecting investors.
Across the border, in Germany, new regulations were approved in April 2015, which 
were not as onerous as some in the crowdfunding industry had feared, but which still imposed limits on retail investors such as an investment cap of €10,000 if they show they can bear the loss, or €1,000 if they cannot.
2
In the leading European market for crowdfunding – the UK – the approach taken by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has been to fit crowdfunding into the existing regulatory framework, rather than creating an entirely new regulatory regime.
Differing regulatory frameworks are not the only challenge to be overcome before 
crowdfunding platforms can operate on a pan‐European basis. As the European Crowdfunding Network has said, a harmonized single market for crowdfunding is still some distance in the future. However, there are a number of other key issues to be addressed by the crowdfunding industry in the meantime.
Crowdfunding, and equity crowdfunding in particular, is still very new; its existence 
is measured in years rather than decades, or centuries in the case of banking. 
1 http://www.eurocrowd.org/files/2014/12/ECN‐Review‐of‐Crowdfunding‐Regulation‐2014.pdf.
2 http://www.eurocrowd.org/2015/04/germany‐adopts‐crowdfunding‐rules/.
CaPital and invest Ment149Although it is growing rapidly, it still represents only a small fraction of the financial 
sector and many people are unfamiliar with it. There is, therefore, a clear need for education both in the case of investors and also on the part of investment‐seeking businesses.
A survey carried out by NESTA in the UK for their report “Understanding Alternative 
Finance”
3 revealed that “sixty per cent of surveyed consumers said they are 
‘unlikely’ or ‘very unlikely’ to begin/continue using alternative finance platforms, citing concerns about perceived risks and a lack of information about those individuals and businesses that they would be funding.”
Similarly, a European Commission report
4 states that in many instances investors 
remain insufficiently informed about the real risk of investing, what exactly they will 
receive in return for their investment, and other aspects, such as voting rights.
Some crowdfunding platforms’ websites do provide this type of information in their 
FAQs, “help” pages, or in investment documentation. 
It is not only a question of educating investors, but also one of transparency and 
protecting the interests of stakeholders. The “crowd” is composed of individuals who may or may not have experience or knowledge of financial markets. How then can the crowd do their best to ensure they are making the right decisions? It is not always easy for them, as certain elements of investing via crowdfunding are less obvious on some platforms than others.
One of the key differences between crowdfunding platforms, which can have the 
greatest impact on investors, is the investment model. There are two current equity crowdfunding investment models: investor‐led and company‐led.
With the “company‐led” approach to crowdfunding, the company seeking capital 
sets its own terms of investment and decides its own valuation. Naturally, it will seek to set the best possible valuation for itself, giving away the minimum amount of equity to secure the funding it requires. Prospective investors are then left to decide whether they want to invest at that valuation, or not.This approach is good for the company but may not be the best for the investor. In the UK, in recent months, several company‐led crowdfunding valuations have been the subject of heated discussion, with some commentators feeling they are unrealistically high and that investors may lose out as a result. How then can an investor ensure that they are investing in a company at the best possible valuation? The answer is to have an angel by your side.
Anyone who has watched Dragons’ Den or Shark Tank will occasionally have seen 
the dragons/sharks rip an entrepreneur’s valuation of his or her own business to shreds. To some extent that is understandable, because start‐up or early‐stage companies often have little in the way of assets or revenue and, as a result, valuations tend to be highly subjective.
Of course this makes for compelling TV viewing, but the important point is that 
dragons/sharks, or business angels as they are more commonly known, generally have years of entrepreneurial experience on their side.
Away from reality TV , the investor‐led crowdfunding model involves a business angel 
or lead investor agreeing a valuation at which they are willing to invest in the company. The goal is to arrive at a negotiated valuation that both parties are happy with. In the process, the angel will usually carry out extensive due diligence, willingly expending the necessary time and resources, as they are potentially investing a considerable sum of money. A report by NESTA – “Siding with the Angels”
5 highlights the value of 
this approach, revealing that angels who perform at least some due diligence, even just 20 hours, experienced fewer failed investments than those who did not.
For their part, the ordinary equity crowdfunding investor is then able to benefit from 
the involvement of the angel and invest under the same or similar terms as them.
AngelList – based in the US, and UK’s SyndicateRoom are two of only a handful of 
platforms operating an investor‐led model. Their investment opportunities involve one or more angels and, on occasions, VCs. This provides investors with the reassurance that an experienced professional is carrying out the necessary due diligence and negotiation to ensure that the investment is properly priced. The fact 
3 https://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/understanding‐alternative‐finance‐2014.pdf.
4 Crowdfunding Innovative Ventures in Europe: http://goo.gl/Ol8Clv.5 http://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/siding_with_the_angels.pdf.150
CaPital and invest Ment150founders get A shares, whereas ordinary investors get B shares, that come without 
voting or pre‐emption rights. This matters because ordinary investors may well see their stake heavily diluted if the company embarks on another round of funding at a higher valuation.
The investor‐led model of crowdfunding has clear benefits for investors over the 
company‐led model. As crowdfunding continues to grow, issues such as the protection of investors, transparency, and education will assume an ever greater importance, not just in the UK market but across Europe as well. Companies that put the investor first will be well‐placed to take advantage of these changes. Will “investor‐led” be added to the Oxford English Dictionary one day? Surely it can only be a matter of time.that the angel is putting their own “skin in the game”, by investing their own money, gives added reassurance to investors. This reassurance does not come entirely without cost for AngelList investors, though, as syndicate‐leads get carry (a tax on investors’ profits).
Properly priced investments are not the only factor in helping to protect the interests 
of investors. In the case of SyndicateRoom, an aspect of their investor‐led approach that benefits investors is that they receive the same share class and price as the angels, whether they are investing £1,000 or £100,000. They also have the same rights in following their money in later rounds, enabling them to avoid excessive dilution.
This is often not the case on crowdfunding platforms that operate the company‐led 
model, as companies can choose to issue more than one class of share. Often 
CaPital and invest Ment151My Robo Advisor was an 
iPod – Applying the Lessons from Other Sectors to FinTech Disruption
By Paolo Sironi 
Thought Leader, Wealth Management Investment Analytics, IBM
FinTechs are hitting the headlines for their potential to disrupt banking services, 
unbundle financial institutions, and tear down barriers to entry by means of digital weapons.
Within the FinTech ecosystem, robo advisors have gained momentum to advise or 
manage private wealth at the expense of established institutions and are poised to become the new price‐makers of the banking relationship. They first appeared around 2010, and leapt to the top of the chart of disruptive innovation a few years later due to a set of concurrent factors:
•	A change in market regulation to favour fee‐only advice, which is affecting global 
markets;
•	A significant growth in assets under management that robo advisors could harvest in a relatively short time;
•	The recognition of appealing not only to low‐margin clients, but also to affluent and high‐net‐worth investors, which were previously thought to be an exclusive target segment of traditional more expensive advisory firms.
Yet, not all FinTechs addressing personal finance can be classified as robo advisors, and not all robo advisors are pure FinTechs.
“What is a robo advisor?”
The terminology “robo advisor” is quite journalistic: they are not always robotic, nor do they always provide advice.Robo advisors (1.0) are automated investment solutions which provide automated portfolio rebalancing using trading algorithms based on passive investments and diversification strategies, which engage individuals with digital tools featuring advanced customer experience, to guide them through a self‐assessment process and shape their investment behaviour towards rudimentary goal‐based decision‐making. It follows that robo advisors must display at least some of these four elements, if not all of them:
•	Provide full digital access;
•	Perform automated portfolio rebalancing;
•	Adopt indexation or passive management;
•	Personalize to customers’ goals and behaviour.
“Is robo technology truly 
disruptive?”
We will answer this question by referring to the theory of innovation, which enables 
us to establish a parallel between the iPod’s disruption of the music industry and the game‐changing nature of robo advisors in banking.
First of all, we do not confine technology to a concept linked to the usage of 
algorithms or digital instruments (e.g. tablets), but we define technology as any process by which a firm (e.g. a bank) transforms information and data, human labour, or economic capital into products or services of greater value. This is of the utmost importance because most banking transactions are essentially “immaterial” and we can ascribe to the technology concept the three elements of digitalization, automated portfolio rebalancing, and goal‐based investing (GBI) principles. We will explain why the latter plays a key role in the evolution of robo advisors.
Second, technology evolves continuously inside and outside individual firms. 
The introduction of new technology modifies the way firms operate and the way consumers access services and products. Therefore, we use the term innovation to indicate any change of existing technology used by a firm and recognize that such a change can take two forms: disruptive innovation or sustaining innovation:152
CaPital and invest Ment152•	Sustaining innovation refers to any improvements in product performance, 
being of incremental nature or more radical, that allow a firm to increase the quality of its offer, to fend off competition, or to increment commercial margins, by operating either at lower costs or with higher affordable prices. Structured finance or hedge funds would be some examples.
•	Disruptive innovation instead might well result in worse product performance, at least in the near term. Such revolutionary products are usually cheaper, simpler, or more convenient to use and appeal to new customers or create new needs in existing clientele.
Robo advisors classify as disruptive technology because they are cheaper than traditional advisory services, they are simpler to access, they appeal to new customers, and create a new need among existing clientele.
Goal‐based investing, which robo advisors represent in a rudimentary fashion, is 
instead a case of sustaining innovation, which will grant the smarter robo advisors the opportunity to move outside the disruptive though unpleasant corner of low margin businesses and achieve margin‐driven growth over time.
Traditional firms typically face two challenges in their lifetime: deciding how much 
investment needs to be dedicated to sustaining innovation and, most importantly, recognizing which disruptive innovation can be the main reason for failure or success of established brands, although such innovation might seem to be anti‐economical in the near term. Banks are not excluded from the need to solve this dilemma.
“How do sustaining and disruptive 
innovation interact to shape the future of banking?”
According to Clayton M. Christensen,1 there is a relationship between innovation 
and industry/product performance over time (i.e. the quality of banking services): 
there seems to be a fixed amount of innovation that a regular customer can absorb, all industries being equal, hence a capped amount of money that investors are willing to pay to receive better products or services. Clearly, not all investors are equally constrained, which permits banks to tier their offers across different segments: retail, affluent, high‐net‐worth (HNW) and ultra‐high‐net‐worth (UHNW). This is represented in the following Figure.
1 http://www.claytonchristensen.com/key‐concepts/.improvement rate: innovation a client can absorb and its variability
 disruptive innovation: introduces simpliﬁed and less expensive
products/services, to appeal to new or less-demanding customers
 sustaining innovation: higher margins and more demandingcustomers once products gain foothold, improvement cycle restartsperformance
time3
32
23
11
Figure:  Innovation and industry/product performance over time
Yet, time goes by, industries evolve, technology changes, and so does investors’ 
behaviour. Thus, markets or segments can saturate: no further innovation can lead to higher commercial margins. This is when disruptive innovation, such as robo advisors, has the highest chance of succeeding. Initially, disruptive solutions are seen as a phenomenon confined to less appealing low margin clients (e.g. retailers) or distant markets (e.g. emerging economies). But disruptive innovation can downshift the product paradigm globally, across markets and segments, so that customers start favouring the new solutions and move en masse towards new offers. This can displace established players who have no time to adjust their traditional workflows or business models. Market leaders become laggards (e.g. Nokia) and new entrants gain momentum (e.g. Apple) and start climbing the hall of fame of successful brands. Thereafter, the cycle of sustaining innovation re‐ignites and successful firms can achieve higher commercial margins by improving once very simple disruptive products.
CaPital and invest Ment153To exemplify why robo advisors have all the potential to be disruptive technology, 
we can briefly discuss what happened in the music industry, when the iPod was first launched.
The first Compact Disc (CD) player was sold in Japan by Sony in 1982. The CD 
levelled up the music industry by setting a higher standard and inducing fierce industry competition by means of sustaining innovation. A period of tech spending involved a large number of consumers who were buying new appliances offering higher levels of sophistication. Within a decade, many households were equipped with advanced High Fidelity sets (Hi‐Fi) featuring equalizers, subwoofers, powerful amplifiers, and fancy head‐sets that parents were willing to buy to reduce noise late at night. Soon, individuals reached a peak point in consuming satisfaction, and in the late 90s they could not possibly justify paying higher prices for a declining marginal improvement in music quality. The music market saturated.
Steve Jobs grabbed this chance and in 2001 launched the Macintosh version of 
iTunes and the first Apple iPod (think of a robo advisor). The key selling point of the iPod was not better music quality compared to existing CD players. The fact is that the product was cheaper, more portable, and certainly cooler than CD players. Those who thought that it would have been a phenomenon confined to young consumers, walking up and down the streets with white cables in their ears, were proved wrong. The era of the Hi‐Fi was over, the traditional way of buying and listening to music was disrupted and changed forever. Most importantly, today the dependence of Apple’s revenues on iPod sales is very limited, as Apple entered a new wave of sustaining innovation to release higher margin services and devices, such as iPhones and iPads up to the Apple Watch in 2015 (think of GBI).
“What does this tell us about the 
fate of wealth management?”
Digital trends are a mix of technology advances and changes in consumers’ 
behaviour which are facilitating the creation of new entrants to compete with traditional banks. Robo advisors are FinTechs which attempt to democratize advisory services that have always been an exclusive privilege of private banking institutions. They started to target retail investors needing financial advice, but lacking the resources to pay for the required services. With an entry level investment of around US$5,000, robo advisors were meant to appeal to low‐margin customers and mostly to a very young clientele whose needs remained unheard by traditional bankers, as they did not account for a large contribution to their balance sheet figures. Yet, robo advisors proved to be very attractive solutions not just for low‐income customers, but also for affluent and high‐net‐worth individuals. Banks, already reconsidering their focus on wealth management operations due to increasing cost of capital in investment banking, yet challenged by tighter market regulation, were quite abashed to see that new entrants were threatening their once dominant positions, filling the headlines of newspapers, and attracting within a short time a considerable amount of venture capital funding.
We can conclude that robo advisors possess all the elements to be a disruptive 
technology and relegate the banking industry to simpler and low‐income business models. Clearly, although new entrants use digital weapons and dump incumbent businesses, neither robo advisors nor the financial institutions willing to invest and transform have any interest in engaging in a huge transformation effort to corner themselves in low‐income shops.
Goal‐based investing will provide a way out for all the players that master the 
battle of disruptive innovation. GBI principles are already present in robo advisors’ propositions, but to a level of simplicity that cannot afford them any leverage and increase commercial margins. Yet, the tendency will be for financial advisory and financial planning to converge within robo models. This will allow robo advisors to tier their offering to appeal to a more diversified client base and will enable them to price up their services by competing on more added value services. The sustaining innovation that GBI can provide is supported by high‐end technology advances, such as cognitive computing and risk‐based portfolio management.
“Will banks be extinct or will they 
transform?”
We cannot predict the future of an industry nor of an individual firm, and we 
cannot say if today’s banking will become extinct or will transform under market and consumer pressure. The latter is the more likely outcome, given the unique characteristics of banking as a regulated and, to a point, a protected industry. However, the industry landscape is truly changing fast. What lies ahead is not a one‐sided competition, FinTechs versus traditional banks and advisors, but rather a likely situation where a handful of digitally transformed firms will become new dominant players, while traditional institutions unwilling or not able to embrace change will become laggards.154
CaPital and invest Ment154Crowdsourced Alpha
By Vinesh Jha 
CEO, ExtractAlpha
In August 2007 many established market‐neutral institutional investors experienced 
sudden losses when some large investor – seeking liquidity to cover losses in another part of his portfolio – liquidated an equity book that had been dedicated to quantitative (“quant”) strategies, which used computer models to select stocks. Because this investor held similar stocks to other quants, the liquidations led to adverse moves across such strategies, and a domino effect ensued as other affected investors liquidated to prevent further losses. Prices snapped back to their previous values, but by that time many investors had locked in large losses.
The following Figure, from Khandani and Lo’s paper “What Happened to the Quants 
in August 2007?”,
1 shows the returns to quant strategies at the time. These were 
market‐neutral strategies designed to be very low‐risk, and a 2% move in a single day was an extreme outlier event.
Quants had a hidden risk: they shared strategies, and therefore positions, with their 
peers. Shared positions led to liquidation risk, high correlation of returns, and a 
1 Journal of Investment Management, 5, 29–78.lack of differentiation from the perspective of underlying investors. The strategies were similar in universe, risk modelling, research techniques, and, most importantly, sources of alpha.
But why were the alphas so similar across established firms? Because their data 
sources were identical. Systematic investors rely on historical data to design strategies. A handful of data sets – financial statements, market data, and broker earnings estimates – dominate these strategies and the academic research which inspires them.
The Need for New Data
Lately, demand for differentiated alpha has increased, and has been met thanks to greater data availability and processing power. New data leads to improved outcomes for managers who are proactive in sourcing the data and implementing models based on it. The question then arises: where does this new data come from? First, an investment manager could dig deeper into traditional qualitative content. FinTech companies such as AlphaSense and RavenPack provide structured data derived from such unstructured sources as conference call transcripts and news. Secondly, data sets can be formed as “exhaust” from other processes. Transactional data such as point‐of‐sale data, or foot or web traffic, originally collected for other purposes, can find utility among  investors. Finally, data can be crowdsourced. Crowdsourcing can be an active  process: a data supplier could ask people to collect data, or to provide 
their opinions. Premise Data Corp crowdsources the collection of pricing data on foods worldwide, leading to accurate inflation expectations. Passive 
crowdsourcing is also possible: opinions can be harvested from blogs, social media, product reviews, etc.
There are, however, some caveats. Historical data may be short, or may exhibit 
survivorship bias if it excludes defunct companies; or it may be thin, including only names in one particular industry. These limitations make it harder to draw inferences in a backtest, or to partition historical data into in‐sample (testing) and out‐of‐sample (validation) periods. The data can be in a nasty format, with no clean identifiers such as ticker, and one must often do the hard work of extracting sentiment or other information from unstructured data. These difficulties are not insurmountable, and the rewards to those data vendors 
Daily returns to 1-day reversal strategy, Aug, 2007 (Khandani and Lo, 2007)
6%7%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
−1%
−2%
−3%
−4%
7/30/20077/31/20078/1/20078/2/20078/3/20078/4/20078/5/20078/6/20078/7/20078/8/20078/9/20078/10/20078/11/20078/12/20078/13/20078/14/20078/15/20078/16/20078/17/20078/18/20078/19/20078/20/20078/21/20078/22/20078/23/20078/24/20078/25/20078/26/20078/27/20078/28/20078/29/20078/30/20078/31/2007
Figure:  Daily returns to 1‐day reversal strategy, August 2007 
Source: Khandani and Lo, 2007
CaPital and invest Ment155or consumers who put effort into sourcing and cleaning this data can be 
significant.
What is Crowdsourced Alpha?
Crowdsourced alpha is the use of multiple humans’ forecasts to make investment decisions. These humans need not know their forecasts are being used – as in the passive crowdsourcing examples above. They need not actually be explicit forecasts. There are many companies attempting to create alpha out of Twitter feeds, extracting company sentiment from 140‐character posts.
To crowdsource alpha, we need a measurable thing to forecast, which we need 
help in forecasting; and we need humans to make the forecasts. We need some platform for the collection of forecasts. We may need to provide some incentive for the forecasts to be provided – monetary (pay me to make a forecast), pride‐based (I want to be the best forecaster), marketing‐based (I want to tell everyone I am the best), or community‐based (I want to share my opinions). We need to clean up noise in the data. A diversity of opinions or knowledge is helpful, allowing us to benefit from the wisdom of the crowd in the generally understood way. It is also useful to have an objective way of measuring forecasting skills. The persistence of skill is valuable. If the good forecasters remain good over time, then skill is an inherent characteristic of the forecasters. We can then have confidence that the top forecasters’ ideas will be worth listening to in the future.
An early example was the IBES (Institutional Brokers Estimates System (I/B/E/S, as 
part of Thomson Reuters)) broker forecast data set. Though commoditized now, the idea was once novel: collect brokers’ earnings per share (EPS) forecasts and combine them into a consensus expectation of earnings. IBES fulfils our needs: a platform for structured forecasts of useful, relatively noise‐free forecasts by incentivized humans. We can debate whether those incentives are great ones, but the data is indisputably valuable. It exhibits many of our wants: the opinions are somewhat diverse, though less so in cases of herding or management guidance, and there is persistent skill in analyst forecasting, as proven in work done at StarMine – now part of Thomson Reuters, but then independent – in the early 2000s.
We can use the crowd to forecast many things. A few examples can be seen in the 
Table below.
Example 1: Crowdsourced 
Earnings Estimates
Estimize is an innovative platform in which the crowd – amateur and professional 
analysts or investors – supplies forecasts of a company’s future EPS and revenues. Contributors may disclose their name and professional status (buy side, independent researcher, individual trader, student, etc.). The pool of 7,000 contributors is equally split among these groups.
A simple average of the crowd’s forecasts is more accurate than Wall Street 
61.8% of the time when there are at least three contributing forecasters. These numbers increase to 64.8% and 66.3% when requiring 10 or 20 forecasters, respectively. There are several hypotheses as to why the crowd would be more accurate than the experts. Although services such as StarMine have brought more accountability to sell‐side research, EPS accuracy is only one input into an analyst’s compensation and prominence. There are behavioural biases in sell‐side earnings estimates, including herding. A forecaster is unlikely to make a notable estimate away from the consensus, for fear of being incorrect. Regulatory What Who Where
EPS, Revenues Sell side
Buy side, Independents, IndividualsIBES, FactSet, CapIQEstimize
Returns Sell side researchSell side sales desksFinancial bloggers and newslettersIndividualsIBES, FactSet, CapIQ, TipRanksTIM GroupSeeking Alpha, Motley Fool, TipRanksPredictWallStreet, StockTwits
Social Sentiment Twitterers, Facebookers Gnip, and many others
Macro Governments, Economists Reuters, Government, 
Consensus Economics, Estimize
M&A Rumor mill Mergerize by Estimize
Strategies Fund managers
Algo developersFoF, multistate firmsQuantopian, QuantConnectTable:  Examples of forecast types which can be crowdsourced
156
CaPital and invest Ment156constraints on sell‐side analysts constrain their ability to produce timely research 
updates. So changes in sell‐side forecasts tend to be gradual. Institutional biases may also exist. Many analysts are employed by institutions which also include investment banking arms. If these banks want to retain the advisory business of their corporate clients, there may be pressure to provide optimistic forecasts on certain issuers.
We can gauge whether the greater accuracy helps investors by looking at the stock 
price reaction to firms which beat the sell‐side’s expectations, versus those which beat the crowd’s expectations. Prices react much more strongly to surprises as benchmarked against the crowd; the expert‐benchmarked market reaction is half the magnitude of the crowd‐benchmarked reaction, and it reverses after a day, whereas the reaction of the crowd is more permanent. So crowdsourced data better represents the market’s expectations of earnings, and an investor who uses it can profit from unexpected earnings (see following Figure).Example 2: Alpha Capture
 “Alpha Capture” refers to institutional investors’ use of trade ideas from sell‐side research sales and specialist sales to drive the investment process. These ideas are distinct from recommendations issued by brokers’ research analysts’ desks, and are privately communicated to clients, who compensate the brokerage firm for the ideas with trading commissions or cash. Ideas are shorter‐term than their research desk counterparts and are more evenly distributed between Buy and Sell.
TIM Group offers the industry’s leading alpha capture platform, called TIM Ideas. 
TIM Ideas has a unique data set of trade ideas on global securities from 2006 by 300 brokers and 3,000 unique “authors”. Trade ideas are not otherwise aggregated into a single database, and only by using TIM can we understand the benefits of aggregating disparate forecasts.
We examine the returns to a trade idea – in the following Figure we have flipped 
the sign so that we expect the returns to both Buy and Sell ideas to look positive. We have restricted our analysis to stocks with at least US$100m market cap, $1m daily trading volume, and $4 in price, and we have adjusted returns to account for industry and common risk factors.
We see strong returns out to ten trading days in all regions. Because of the short 
horizon of trade ideas, acting on them in a timely manner is important.
0 1 2 3 4 50.25%
0.20%
0.15%
0.10%
0.05%
−0.05%0.00%Cumulative residual returns to >5% surprises
Estimize EPS (N=2521) Wall Street EPS (N=2755)
Figure:  Cumulative residual returns to >5% surprises0.4%
0.3%
0.2%
0.0%
−0.1%
−0.2%
−0.3%
−0.4%
−5 0 5 10 15 200.1%Cumulative signed mean return to ideas by region
North America Europe Asia
Figure:  Cumulative signed mean return to ideas by regionContributor accuracy is persistent from quarter to quarter: better‐ranked contributors are 36% more likely to remain better ranked in the future, and poorly‐ranked contributors 36% more likely to remain poorly ranked, than they are to switch to the opposite. So we can improve our forecasts by focusing on the best contributors.
CaPital and invest Ment157Table:  Historical returns of equity market neutral portfolios built using the TIM Indicator
Region Decile Annual Return Decile Sharpe Ratio Decile Hit Rate % days Stocks per Decile Decile Daily Turnover
Global 29.61% 5.52 69% 336 12%
North America 20.84% 2.56 59% 164 11%
Europe (excluding UK) 42.17% 5.02 65% 56 13%
United Kingdom 44.73% 3.7 61% 25 15%
Japan 31.70% 3.19 59% 50 12%
Asia (excluding Japan) 35.60% 2.79 59% 36 12%
Australia and New Zealand 36.84% 2.02 57% 13 13%Author performance is persistent: authors who have had profitable ideas in the past 
continue to provide superior trade ideas in the future. Authors are 47% more likely to stay in an extreme performance group (top or bottom quintile) than they are to fall to the opposite quintile.
The top ideas can also be combined into a stock selection signal, the TIM Indicator. 
The long/short returns to this signal are shown in the following Figure. The gross Sharpe ratio of a trade idea‐driven strategy is, remarkably, over 5, and the numbers comfortably survive transaction costs, indicating that crowdsourced trade ideas can be used to generate significant alpha.Example 3: Financial Bloggers
Attention to crowdsourced alpha has focused on identifying sentiment on Twitter. Microblog sentiment is well explored, so we focus on a more finance‐relevant subset of social media, financial bloggers. Blogs such as Seeking Alpha and Motley Fool produce content which is designed to predict stocks, but is underexploited by institutional investors. TipRanks collects investment advice from 65 news and financial blog sources, and applies Natural Language Processing (NLP) to derive sentiment measures. 122,000 recommendations from more than 4,000 authors on over 2,000 US equities have been collected in real time, creating a robust collection of qualified sentiment. These blogs are targeted to financial readers, with articles by buy‐side investors and industry experts. Contributors are often compensated, and typically disclose existing positions to mitigate the effects of potential conflicts of interest.
Figure:  TIM Indicator cumulative decile returns, globalTIM Indicator cumulative decile returns, global
600%
500%
400%
300%
200%
100%
0%
Mar-07Jul-07Nov-07Mar-08Jul-08Nov-08Mar-09Jul-09Nov-09Mar-10Jul-10Nov-10Mar-11Jul-11Nov-11Mar-12Jul-12Nov-12Mar-130.3%
0.2%
0.0%
−0.1%
−0.2%
−0.3%
−10 10 0 20 30 40 50 600.1%Cumulative residual returns
blogger recommendations
Buy Sell
Figure:  Cumulative residual returns blogger recommendations158
CaPital and invest Ment158In the following Figure, we show the residual returns to Buy and Sell 
recommendations from financial blog posts, with the universe as before. Due to the retail focus of these blog posts, 84% of the recommendations are Buys.
Clearly there is alpha in financial blog posts. A market‐neutral investment strategy 
which buys the stocks with recent Buy recommendations and shorts those with recent Sell recommendations is significantly more profitable, as shown in the following Figure, which uses the TipRanks Expert Sentiment Signal (TRESS).A financial blog‐based strategy demonstrated an annualized return of 18.8% and a Sharpe ratio of 2.13 over this time period in market‐neutral terms, demonstrating the relatively unexploited power of financial blog data when implemented in a systematic way.
In summary, investment managers now have access to innovative data sets which 
crowdsource alpha, and which allow them to differentiate their return streams from those investors who continue to use commoditized data sets. These data sets offer significant, measurable performance improvements over traditional sources. As more data becomes available to investment managers, and as the types of forecasts which can be crowdsourced proliferate, investment managers and their clients will benefit.
TRESS Cumulative L/S decile returns
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1/3/2011 7/3/2011 7/3/2012 1/3/2013 1/3/2014 7/3/2013 1/3/2012
Figure:  TRSS cumulative L/S decile
CaPital and invest Ment159To Crowdsource a Hedge Fund
By Andrew Campbell 
Data Analyst, Quantopian
Quantitative investing, using computer algorithms to run a portfolio, carries enormous 
economic incentives. Five out of the top six hedge fund managers in 2014 were quants. Quantitative investors Kenneth Griffin of Citadel, James Simmons of Renaissance Technologies, and Ray Dalio of Bridgewater each earned over $1 billion in 2015 alone. Bridgewater itself has $169 billion under management. Their algorithmically informed Pure Alpha fund has an average annualized return of 18%, having lost money in only three years of its 20‐year life.
Yet, in a world of 7 billion people, there are only around 5,000 professional quants. 
Why should we believe that only such a small population of managers is capable of harnessing algorithms to generate top returns? Daily leaps in engineering and the widely documented finance‐to‐tech brain drain are proof that not all investing talent resides in the cubicles of elite hedge funds. Individuals from a wide range of backgrounds are capable of beating the market. When aggregated, this talent has the potential to compete with Wall Street’s finest institutions. There is a significant opportunity for the crowd to disrupt the guarded world of quantitative investing.
Why is quantitative investing not bigger? Should the financial upside not draw more 
people to the profession? The answer lies in two barriers to entry: technology and track record. For individuals, algorithmic investing tools are hard to develop and data is prohibitively expensive. A lone quant will spend much more time building and maintaining a trading rig than he or she will creating actual strategies. Even if you do have a trading platform, attracting investors is nearly impossible without a viable track record. Who would trust you? As an aspiring manager, your only hope is to land a job at an accredited hedge fund.
But what if this was not the case? What if everyone had the tools they needed 
to create a track record and raise capital backing? Surely, given the right tools, many of the world’s scientists, engineers, and hobbyists would apply their intellect to the markets. This democratization of quant finance is already well underway. Accessible data sources, free education resources, low‐cost cloud‐based research, back‐testing, and execution platforms are levelling the playing field. But even with the right tools, individual quants need a third party to give their back‐testing and live trading results a stamp of legitimacy. Without an impartial scale on which to compare managers, investors will never throw their capital behind the crowd. The time has come to give aspiring quants the chance to earn their stripes. Competitive forums in other fields have given birth to efficient hiring networks. TopCoder’s competitive arena for programmers and Kaggle’s data science leaderboards have become go‐to resources for job‐hunters to communicate their skills to prospective employers. Surely, the world of quant finance can follow this model. Nothing more than a good idea should be necessary to begin developing the track record needed to attract investment.
The structure and implementation of this quant crowdsourcing platform are not to 
be glossed over. It is very unlikely that any good manager would be willing to simply show their algorithm code to potential investors. What would stop the investor from stealing the idea? This market failure was explored by Kenneth Arrow in his famous “Arrow Information Paradox”. The paradox states that valuable intellectual property (IP) will only change hands when the buyer feels confident that they are buying good technology at a fair price. Yet, if the invention is revealed to the buyer in the pre‐sale process, it has in effect been given to him or her. As a result, valuable IP is unlikely to change hands without patent protection. To avoid these IP trade frictions, all algorithm evaluation must be based on analysis of a strategy’s returns, not on the underlying code.
To verify the validity of a return’s track record, the investment platform must itself 
run tests on the algorithm being judged while keeping its code encrypted. Allowing individuals to submit their own data would leave investors vulnerable to fraud. This mass execution and comparison of investing algorithms is only feasible when the algorithms themselves are written in a standardized format. To make this common format and evaluation process attractive to quants, a robust all‐in‐one algorithm creation and comparison package is necessary. When a platform for researching, writing, back‐testing, deploying, and comparing trading strategies becomes an investor in its own user base, a symbiosis emerges. The quants get a free platform for researching and writing algorithms that will always remain their own intellectual property and the chance to win significant capital backing. While the rest of the world is left analysing quarterly returns on a few dozen strategies, the platform‐investor gets to build their portfolio by looking minutely at returns from hundreds of thousands of strategies. With this mass of data in hand, a fund can more accurately invest in the strong and uncorrelated algorithms needed to form an elegantly diversified portfolio.160
CaPital and invest Ment160To understand the full beauty of a crowdsourced hedge fund, we must first 
define the portfolio theory term “diversification”. Diversification is the systematic dampening of risk through the ownership of uncorrelated return streams. Think of the daily return of an asset as the sum of its true underlying growth rate and a risk term. Each day, that risk term draws a value (which can be positive or negative) from a normal distribution and adds it to the price of the asset. This random element of price movement defines the volatility of the asset. When we hold a diverse basket of assets, we expect the correlation of their risk terms to be lower. With uncorrelated risk terms, we expect those daily fluctuations in price to cancel each other out. By isolating the growth rates of our assets, diversification allows us to achieve our target return with lower volatility.
Money managers use the “Sharpe ratio” (a portfolio’s annual return in excess of the 
risk‐free government bond return divided by portfolio volatility) to quantify the balance between a strategy’s past risk and reward. The Sharpe ratio is particularly useful when it comes to exposing the results’ diversification. For example, some simple maths tells us that a portfolio of 15 uncorrelated return streams, each with a Sharpe ratio of only 0.2, is likely to yield an aggregate Sharpe of 1.0. Even if you are chasing high returns, a strategy with low volatility relative to returns may be preferable. Leverage, broker loaned funds that can be used to purchase more assets, can be used to raise returns while keeping volatility below an acceptable threshold.
For the last 30 years, most portfolio diversification occurred through the inclusion 
of uncorrelated types of assets. Each new “thing” that was securitized became an opportunity to offset the risk of another asset class. However, at a certain point, relying on traditional assets to diversify has its limits. New frontiers for diversification are unlocked when the assets in your portfolio are actually portfolios themselves. Imagine a portfolio of trading signals where each signal has a given rate of poor decision‐making and good decision‐making. To minimize your risk at a given level of proﬁtability, you would want poor decisions by each of the signals to be uncorrelated events. Given a low correlation between the daily decision qualities of your signals, even a slight bias towards good decision‐making is very likely to generate a steady proﬁt. The key to lowering the correlation between signals is diversity in data sources and data interpretation.
The recent explosion in data availability has raised the potential for signal 
diversification immensely. According to a 2014 IBM report, 90% of the data generated by humankind has been created in the last two years. As the pool of available data grows, the potential for diversification through data interpretations expands at a significantly faster rate. With the rise of “big data” has come a reinvigoration of R&D activity in statistics, machine learning, and distributed computing. Data is being mined for new insights and optimizations in ways that were impossible even a few years ago. For each additional dataset that becomes available, there are dozens of ways in which that dataset could be used to generate a trading signal.
This is where crowdsourcing comes in. By investing in a collection of fine‐tuned 
quantitative strategies drawn from the crowd, the inputs, parameters, and underlying theory behind each of these strategies become potential sources of diversification. Aggregating strategies into a portfolio is not a new idea. First introduced in the 1960s, the “fund of funds” model has attracted substantial mainstream attention and investment. However, no fund has ever capitalized on the potential benefits of aggregated investing talent at a massive scale. If we assume that manager skill among independent quants is normally distributed, given enough algorithms, the probability of finding a promising collection of uncorrelated strategies is very high.
For the last hundred years, hedge funds have been run as highly centralized 
institutions. Only a select group of highly educated and proven managers are privy to the investment process. Even at a large fund, it is not uncommon for one star player to call all the shots. This concentrated decision‐making paradigm is set to be challenged by the collective wisdom of the crowd. When individuals everywhere are given the tools to build a track record and win investment, genuine meritocracy becomes a reality in quant finance.
CaPital and invest Ment161Providing Capital and Beyond
By Kayar Raghavan
Angel Investor and Non-Executive Director 
People use the words money and capital interchangeably but that is a mistake. 
Capital is scarce. Do not believe anyone who says otherwise. Money on the other hand is plentiful. That is why we see near zero or negative interest rates for money kept in banks. Money is not of much use if it is not productive. Capital on the other hand is money productively invested and deployed. It is, therefore, even scarcer when it comes to angel or venture capital, which is sought to be invested in enterprises run by others. A blog from Reid Hoffman says that a general partner looks at a few thousand (you read that right) companies before investing in two firms at best, in a given year.
Why am I saying this? Whether it is scarce public capital provided to start‐up 
firms by governments in the form of grants, loans, equity, and tax rebates or private capital provided by angel investors, venture capital, corporate VCs, and private equity firms, it is a responsibility enjoined upon them to ensure that the funds are put to extraordinarily good use. However, there are not many young firms that reach that threshold of good use, that of a potential to yield multiple returns and other benefits such as employment creation or environmental sustainability to their stakeholders. No wonder, too, that almost four out of five start‐ups do not even return the invested capital. This is also, unfortunately, for a good reason.
Investors, both private and government, put money into start‐ups whose idea, 
product, team, and execution skills, put together, can create value, immense value, for them. The value may take any form. It may be pure financial returns to the private investors, while for governments and quasi‐governmental bodies it may in the main be the creation of greater employment opportunities or be advantageous in areas such as public health and education. However, in order for these forces to create value, they require underlying drivers to operate in tandem and at their optimum potential. All these underlying variable/drivers are interconnected and, if they all exist, can substantially increase the likelihood of success. They do not always operate in isolation and are often part of a larger ecosystem. This is where the private and public investor communities can, should, indeed in my opinion, badly need to, play a much more effective role.While a few private investors such as angels and early venture capital firms do take up active roles such as board director, advisor, mentor, Entrepreneur in Residence (EiR) and the like, helping the investee companies from within and without, this chapter addresses the larger issues in the public space which both private capital and government may collaborate to address. Addressing some of these issues is so transformational that it may take up to a generation for the drivers to be fully effective. This is because there are structural weaknesses, although a few of these may be country‐, region‐, or culture‐specific. Some other deficiencies and drawbacks may be addressed in a shorter time horizon. What is not in doubt is that these areas are in need of massive regeneration and re‐engineering, and unless this task is undertaken very swiftly, the future repercussions may be catastrophic, not just in terms of lost opportunities for employment creation, a first‐order problem in much of the world, but also in causing further damage to what may already be a fragile social cohesion, at  least in some inner cities.
The Great Digital Divide
Access to technology is a fundamental infrastructure issue, at several levels, with huge ramifications, but in particular to developing a healthy and employment‐generating tech ecosystem. On the one hand, a large percentage of the population in many countries simply does not have the wherewithal in terms of literacy, much less, digital literacy, to access digital knowledge, means, and assets. As technology and innovation continue to advance at a rapid pace, the divide becomes even more acute for the digitally disadvantaged. This is a very marked divide even in advanced countries, let alone developing and underdeveloped countries. Lack of digital literacy, combined with an ageing population in much of the European continent, is a case in point. Let me amplify this with a real life example.
Thanks to technology, much of banking and financial services has moved online. 
However, banks, even those starved of capital, are compelled to keep open totally unviable branches to serve those who cannot go online and use internet banking and, therefore, require in‐person services. Post offices are kept open to accept small savings and to dispense benefit payments to the elderly. The result of this is that the cost of distribution and delivery remains high to the detriment of the taxpayer. This also deprives those start‐ups that provide these services digitally of an opportunity to scale up to serve all those in need of financial services. The result 162
CaPital and invest Ment162is capital loss on both counts: one, a case of higher public expenditure and the 
other, a case of potential revenue loss.
Lack of digital awareness and literacy also have other deleterious effects on society. 
The number of cases of personal data breaches, people being cheated out of their funds, and crimes of an even more serious nature such as personal security being compromised, is on the increase thanks to the literacy divide between the digitally aware and the digitally deficient. This obviously puts a huge burden on the exchequer as governments have to spend a vast amount of resources to protect the digitally innocent from the unscrupulous but digitally sophisticated.
The other major reason for the digital divide is simply lack of access. In many 
countries, communication infrastructure is neither uniform nor fully reliable. Vast areas are still unconnected by internet with reliable bandwidth. Then there is the need for digital education and training in these far‐flung areas. How then do young firms make their products and services available to people and businesses in these places? Even if they can do so, is it at affordable price points for both buyers and sellers? How many potential customers are lost to the start‐ups due solely to this issue?
Large‐scale Revamping  
of Education and Training
One of the biggest drawbacks in the realm of formal education, seen across the 
world, is the fact that much of the curriculum remains unchanged for years. Add to this the fact that it is often conducted independent of the realities of life outside school and another significant gap emerges. Technology is moving at supersonic speed, while much of the school curriculum moves, if at all, like a bullock‐cart. The pace of product growth in consumer electronics, financial services, big data processing, delivery services growth through cloud, mobile, and social media is not just unmatched by the pace of education and training, but the difference is huge and increasing by the day. This causes, and has already caused, a massive supply deficit in terms of technical resources to businesses in general, but more particularly to the start‐ups, which can hardly afford the high costs associated with hiring the very few and rare resources available in these technology‐driven fields. Speak to any start‐up cluster in any city in the world today and the lack of technical resources will be flagged up as the number one issue.Yet another facet of much of the formal education system is its dependence on rote and the premium it places on high grades. This concentrates young minds on the immediacy of getting a higher grade and into the best schools and universities. Barring some major universities, there is almost no recognition given to experimentation, innovation, risk‐taking, and public leadership in the curricula of most universities, much less schools. There is also the inherited culture in most societies where failure invites harsh criticism and public disgrace. This is hardly conducive to promoting an environment where starting a private enterprise or investing in one, both of which involve an inclination to take risks without fearing potential failure, is encouraged.
Education, training, and keeping pace with innovation is only marginally better at 
the big corporate and regulatory levels. Regulations lag by a big margin, even in relatively older domains such as medical devices and drug testing, crowdfunding, and e‐commerce not to speak of a number of recent innovations such as bitcoin, blockchain, etc. When only one in five thousand synthesizers tested are used and only one in three drugs finally passed for use breaks even in terms of numbers, what is required of regulators is an adaptive approach that is outcome‐oriented. The recent case of fast‐tracking experimental Ebola drugs should be very instructive. But do we always have to wait for an emergency to drive innovation faster?
In addition, big corporations need to re‐engineer their supply chains to 
accommodate the purchase of products and services from small firms. The time and resources spent in attracting big corporations as clients, notwithstanding a good business case, are simply unaffordable to most start‐ups.
Growth Financing and Exit 
Opportunities
The start‐up ecosystem can only be as strong as the encouragement and 
opportunities available for young risk‐takers and innovators to leverage. One of the essential pillars of this ecosystem is the availability of finance at the early and seed stages. However, this is only possible, or in any case facilitated, by recycling old seed and early‐stage monies, in addition to the injection of new monies. In essence, early angels need to recoup their early investments so that they can invest and de‐risk new entrepreneurships.
CaPital and invest Ment163Raising money from other people to fund one’s start‐up business is never easy. It is 
particularly hard to do so in the early stages where there is little empirical evidence within the firm to back up any claims or projections. Angel investors understand this and there is hence a smaller burden of proof imposed on founders and start‐ups at this stage. When it comes to growth capital, though, fundraising assumes new dimensions in terms of complexity. Start‐ups often have to show a minimum viable product or service, a level of customer traction and, importantly, product or service stickiness. While founders are understandably disinclined to dilute much at this stage, venture capital requirements are often fairly steep: 25% to 30% ownership at series A level. Given where their businesses are, many start‐ups do not attract the level of valuation to be able to give away a big chunk of their firm, on the back of a prior round of angel funding and dilution. The VCs on the other hand are not prepared to engage with a start‐up where their quantum of funding is below a minimum threshold. As VCs generally invest in no more than two firms per general partner per year on average, it is in their opinion sub‐optimal for them to spend much time with a start‐up that cannot absorb a level of funding that they are comfortable with.
Then there is the point about intellectual property (IP), or rather the lack of it, trotted 
out by some venture funds as the reason for not funding start‐ups. These are days of open sourcing that developers can tap into and where the crowdsourcing of ideas and design are almost the norm. When Elon Musk is throwing open Tesla design principles to be copied by other car manufacturers, IP should not be of great value to anyone – barring a rare case of drug discovery – other than keeping some patent attorneys busy. Facebook, Apple, and Google have umpteen patents but they don’t make their monies from their patents, nor is any of their functionality totally irreplaceable. It is ultimately all about execution; that is, how nimble the company and the product are in receiving user feedback, adding new functionality, and iteratively making available to users feature‐rich products, all of which can be done without making a great effort to protect patents.
VC funding is not available to start‐ups that have not been substantially de‐risked, 
as we have seen above. The level of de‐risking expected of start‐ups by venture funds is high, particularly in areas where precedent is lacking. The exceptions are start‐ups founded or angel‐backed by investors who have already had successful exits or the start‐up is in a domain that is the latest fad and backed by several VCs at the same time. All others have to kiss several frogs before they find a VC prince. Even when they find one, the terms are prohibitive in terms of anti‐dilution provisions such as full ratchets and the like, not to speak of unreasonable cash costs on account of due diligence and stock options allocation for mentorship imposed on the start‐up. Much of this is simply unaffordable for many young companies. No surprise then that the delta between angel funding and VC funding is often referred to as the “death valley”.
The demand–supply mismatch for growth funding is thus too pronounced, resulting 
in the effort becoming monumental, causing distraction and consequent disruption in the start‐up’s life with the result that many firms struggle to get growth funding. What then is the remedy?
A small country like Israel, which is second only to the United States in the number 
of technology companies listed on Nasdaq, has a lot to teach us here. In 1993 the Israeli government created Yozma, a $100 million fund of funds that in three years spawned 10 venture capital funds. In each one, Yozma, an Israeli private partner, and a foreign private partner with proven fund management expertise, all invested approximately equal amounts. From the start, the Israeli government gave the private sector partners an option to buy out its interest in the funds at attractive terms – a fact often overlooked by other governments that copy the Yozma model. That option was exercised by eight of the 10 funds, profitably for the government, by the way. Five years after the founding of Yozma, its remaining assets were liquidated by auction. The government’s exit served as market proof that real value had been generated and is one of the reasons that the Israeli venture capital industry not only became self‐sustaining, but simultaneously achieved a quantum leap in growth.
1
In countries such as the United Kingdom, there exist at series A stage several opportunities to access grants and government or quasi‐government co‐funds. By their very mandate, these grants and co‐funds are tasked to encourage start‐ups through funding and investment, or to fill in the void where angel or VC funding falls short. This happens not only in areas of long gestation such as drug discovery and medical devices manufacturing and sales, but also in technological innovations that are disruptive, that promote public health, clean energy, a better environment and, often, simply create productive employment. These have indeed spanned firms from drug discovery to e‐commerce, to analytics, to mobile health. Other countries and governments may emulate this model too.
1 Source: HBR.164
CaPital and invest Ment164Many countries can also follow the example of the UK and a few other European 
countries as well as places like Singapore in Asia, where there are liberal tax concessions provided to angel investments. This will have the effect of attracting, once again, large‐ticket angel investments, thus obviating the need for start‐ups to look for series A funding early on, before attaining product/project maturity and market penetration. Indeed, the UK government’s EIS/SEIS programmes are likely to have a phenomenal cascading effect in terms of additional angel investments once early angels start exiting profitably.
Also, if the VCs and later‐stage funders, including government funds, can offer 
secondary exits at series A/B as a matter of course, even if only partially, to angel and seed investors, the latter would be prepared to fund start‐ups more liberally, thus postponing the stage at which the start‐ups look for growth funding. This will enable series A/B to come in at a slightly later stage when the start‐ups will have had enough traction and are in a position to provide the requisite comfort to VCs.
Yet another avenue to provide exit opportunities for angels and early‐stage investors 
is to create exchanges for purchase and sale of private securities, which can provide much‐needed liquidity to these investments. These can be appropriately regulated, as India has sought to do, so that there is full transparency in the system. Participation by private and public funds in these exchanges would provide phenomenal opportunities for liquidity and consequent recycling of capital, resulting in constant regeneration of the entire start‐up ecosystem.
What I have outlined above are just some important areas to which private–public 
partnerships and governments should pay immediate attention. Large funds, businesses, and governments must continually prioritize a number of other aspects of business so that we can all cope with several competing demands – a youth bulge seeking employment leading to a large‐scale labour migration, technological progress and innovation driving consumption patterns and climate change, demographic stagnation in Europe and China versus demographic dividends in Africa and South/Central Asia, are just some of the most pressing issues that will shape the FinTech sector of tomorrow.
These other areas encompass capacity building in the form of constant creation 
and maintenance of a healthy private and public investment climate, improved market access to small businesses, reduced friction and cost of doing business, help in scaling up businesses and, finally, creatively constructing financing and exit opportunities for risk‐takers. We can see that human capital matters at least as much as traditional investment capital.
CaPital and invest Ment165Enterprise 
Innovation7Innovation has not been the focus of financial institutions 
since the financial crisis as established players had to keep up with constantly changing regulatory requirements globally. This part provides the reader with an overview on how established financial companies innovate by leveraging both internal and external partnerships and innovation methodologies. The authors recommend an effective internal governance and stakeholder engagement model and share detailed insights on innovation labs, a very popular enterprise innovation strategy. The authors also focus on the collaboration options between established financial institutions and FinTech firms, including Corporate Venture Investing, explaining how to manage a successful internal investment arm. Finally, the insurance sector and the potential opportunities for innovation that exist within insurance are discussed.Can Banks Innovate?
By Alessandro Hatami
Founder, The Pacemakers
2015 is the year when it became clear that the digital revolution has finally hit the 
banking industry. A couple of headlines illustrate that: global investment in Financial Technology (FinTech) has tripled in 2013–14
1 and the British Bankers Association 
announced that mobile banking has become the preferred way for customers to engage with their banks.
2 Most banks (although still not all) have finally come to 
realize that they need to start engaging with their customers with levels of speed, transparency, precision, and fairness that are simply not possible with the traditional branches and telephone banking approach. Banks are spending substantial amounts in IT, but their total investment globally is only expected to grow at 4.6% in 2014–15, and most of this will be spent on the maintenance of existing legacy systems.
With these changes underway, the leadership of most banks is increasingly keen to 
explore ways to become more innovative, and a growing amount of investment is being allocated to innovation. Some banks have established innovation teams – often headed by non‐banking “disruptors” from other more innovative industries – and have allocated reasonable budgets to invest in delivering new ideas. Some banks have engaged in partnering with business accelerators and incubators – these are organizations that select promising FinTech start‐ups for the banks to mentor, fund, and even partner with.
3 Last but not least, some banks have established investment 
funds to be able to invest directly in early‐stage companies in the sector.4
All these initiatives have had the desired effect of creating a certain level of excitement within the banks, with a good number of PR opportunities to 
1 “The Future of Fintech and Banking”, Accenture Study, March 2015 http://www.fintechin-
novationlablondon.net/media/730274/Accenture‐The‐Future‐of‐Fintech‐and‐Banking‐
digitallydisrupted‐or‐reima‐.pdf.
2 “The Way We Bank Now: World of Change”, report by the BBA and EY – June 2015 https://
www.bba.org.uk/news/press‐releases/mobile‐phone‐apps‐become‐the‐uks‐number‐one‐way‐to‐bank/#.ViEDdH6rSM8.
3 See Startupbootcamp FinTech, Barclays Techstars, and Startup Accelerator with Wells Fargo.
4 Corporate Venture Funds have been established by Santander, BBVA, Sberbank, American 
Express, Citibank, and Visa to name a few.underscore their commitment to renewal and innovation. They have also generated 
long lists of possible innovative propositions. Some of these have even progressed to pilot stage – but very few have actually been delivered at scale to the banks’ customer bases. This is because banks are fundamentally not designed to be innovative.
The business culture of most banks values consistency, reliability, predictability, and 
short‐term profitability. These values have served the banks very well in the past, but they are very ill‐suited to a marketplace that is being disrupted and requires the ability to respond quickly, often with an action plan that is not yet well‐defined. This cultural disconnect has left banks unable to embrace the continuous innovation approach of businesses like Google and Amazon, built to constantly innovate. Most of the innovation that we see in banks is based on expensive, and hard to replicate isolated efforts.
5
Does this mean the banks will not be able to innovate and meet the digital challenge? Not necessarily.
Banks build things all the time. They have well‐established procedures and 
guidelines to do this that are extensively used and well‐tested. To build new propositions, the innovation team within a bank needs to learn to apply the same approach to innovation propositions. Most new things banks build have certain requirements in common. They all have:
•	A sponsor with sway,
•	Engaged stakeholders,
•	Confidence of customer buy‐in, and
•	A business case with a strong investment justification.
To start delivering at scale, a bank’s innovation team needs to use a similar 
approach for all propositions they believe their bank should launch. These propositions should have business cases comparable to the banks’ other investments.
5 A few examples of these are Pingit at Barclays, MoneyManager at Lloyds Bank, and 
BankAmerideals at Bank of America.170
EntErPrisE innovation170In order to put together these business cases, the innovation team need to create 
a delivery process that will enable them to run and afford several experiments every year, with an allowance for many of these not to succeed and to ensure that all those that do succeed meet the requirements of being eventually launched at scale. The key components of this process are a strong engagement with the bank, a deep understanding of how it does things, and the ability to experiment and test new ideas with customers quickly and cheaply. True innovation is based on experimentation, and it should be acceptable that the outcome of some experiments may be not to go ahead. Without failure, it could mean that the innovation efforts are being too conservative and not enough risks are being taken. Addressing costs and duration are also fundamental needs – most things banks do take too long and cost too much. This makes failure unaffordable. If the traditional delivery procedures are applied to innovation, failure cannot become an option.
Let us take a closer look at what needs to be in place to deliver innovation:
Sponsors with Sway
One of the key principles of delivering change in a big organization is that things 
are built on behalf of someone. This someone can be the regulator, the Compliance/Legal Division, or more often a P&L (profit and loss) owner. Even the greatest ideas, without the support and sponsorship of a business owner will not get built. Should this support not be there, it is often better for the Innovation team to focus on propositions that do have it and to pass on those that do not – even if these seem great ideas. A decent innovation that is actually delivered at scale is better than a great one that is not. The most important point to ensure is that the sponsor is committed to support a full‐scale launch of the proposition if it is proven with customers and meets return targets.
This approach does have a downside, however. What should the innovation team 
do about strong ideas without adequate sponsor support? This can be common, especially in situations of channel conflict. There are no easy solutions in this case. An option is to shop the idea around to other potential sponsors – if the product teams are not supportive, then maybe the compliance teams, worried about customer treatment, could be. Another option is to escalate within the bank’s hierarchy – but this option often leads to political complications and should be used sparingly. The third option is to wait and to move on to the next idea – good ideas do have a tendency to resurrect themselves. All in all, though, it is helpful to realize that sometimes good ideas will not get built.
Engaged Stakeholders
It is best that the innovation team identify and engage with the various stakeholders – or gatekeepers – as soon as possible in the lifecycle of the experiment, right after having secured the sponsor buy‐in. Stakeholders include employee representatives from Compliance, Fraud, Risk, Finance, HR, Operations, IT, Procurement, and more. These are the people that can stop the launch of a project. It is key that representatives of all these areas be at least informed of the experiment. It is important to involve all interested internal parties of an innovation experiment early on, because if the stakeholders will stop a new idea it is better for this to happen before too much time and effort is spent on it. In my experience, early engagement softens the stakeholders’ stance when it comes to final approval.
Stakeholder engagement is not only a necessary precaution. Stakeholders can 
in fact often be strong contributors to the quality of the experiment. I have been involved in a project where the representative from the legal team came up with a nuance that fundamentally changed the propositions for the better. But it is important to be cautious of not losing control of the experiment because, when left to their own devices, stakeholders can also easily damage an experiment – so the engagement with them has to be treated with the utmost care. Stakeholders are necessary, but need to be managed well.
Confidence of Customer Buy‐in
The best way to understand if customers want something is to let them use it. So the next important step is to create a prototype that, as far as possible, looks and feels like the end product to the customer. The non‐customer‐facing back‐end, though, can sometimes be done less rigorously. Imagine an app that looks great to the customer, but the back‐end integration is done by a colleague typing very quickly to enter the data into the system. The real objective of prototyping is to get first‐hand customer feedback from a large enough sample of customers to either stop the idea or put together a realistic business case. It is important that a prototype is both inexpensive and quick so as to make potential failure affordable and to enable 
EntErPrisE innovation171the bank to run several experiments a year, not just a handful. Small scale, speed, 
and cheapness are not attributes generally associated with the normal delivery capabilities of a bank, and therefore the innovator should explore building an alternative delivery process, possibly outside the bank, to build their prototypes.
Business Case
A strong business case is the key prerequisite for building anything in a bank. This is a document that has structure and content that is a reflection of a bank’s culture and beliefs. As such, it is fundamental the innovation teams understand how to build one. Luckily, if they have got this far, they are likely to have all the necessary components aligned.
A business case needs an owner – in this case the sponsor fulfils that role. He or 
she will act as the advocate for the investment in the proposition at the appropriate decision‐making fora. The business case will need an analysis of the return on investment. All the components are to hand. The results of the prototype will provide the base data to forecast a revenue number. Several of the stakeholders will provide the other needed inputs: IT and Operations will contribute to the costs analysis and Finance will validate the financial analysis. Other stakeholders will ensure the business case meets the regulatory, fraud, and compliance requirements.Done right, the business case of the innovation proposition will look like any other project to be financed by the bank. With this approach, innovation will be disguised as business‐as‐usual, substantially increasing the likelihood of it being actually delivered at scale.
This approach is very helpful with innovation that has a clear path to profitability. As 
we know, this is not the case for many innovations. What should the approach be with non‐profitable innovations? In some instances not having a path to profitability means that the idea should not be delivered at scale in the first place – in fact, the key objective of the prototyping is to identify these ideas before too much time and money has been spent on them. In some cases, however, the innovation proposition should be built even without a clear path to profitability. This can be because of competition, public opinion, regulation, and more. In those cases also the sponsor, stakeholders, prototype, and business case approach will still deliver the right framework to get the proposition built.
Innovation and digital change are changing the banking industry. It is the role of 
the effective Innovation team to help the bank understand, accept, and deliver innovation to customers – even without having to fundamentally change their culture.
And as more and more innovative ideas are delivered, it is possible – even likely – 
that the culture of the bank will change.172
EntErPrisE innovation172So, You Think the Innovation 
Lab is the Answer?
By Andra Sonea
FinTech Thought Leader 
In the public perception, the banking world has remained almost unchanged while 
other industries have remodelled themselves in response to the global crisis and, recently, increasing pressure from digital customers. Bankers, consultants, and regulators on the other hand would state that the banking world has changed dramatically and they can even point to the thousands of millions spent in transformation programmes across the financial services industry. I would argue that clients do not see or feel this “transformation” – they largely get the same products and services as they used to get 20 years ago. While all banks now offer a mobile and web platform, the type of information offered is still the same and there is no sign of product personalization or contextual financial information allowing the customers to make the best financial decisions.
Life has undoubtedly accelerated as compared to 20 years ago. I can now buy 
online items ranging from books to electronics, even on my commute, within a timeframe which previously required days of browsing on the high street in order to make the final purchase. Now, mere seconds of impulsivity can unbalance people’s finances and lives because they do not have, at their fingertips, the information needed to take financial decisions with confidence. While everybody thought real change in banking would come from regulatory change and large transformation programmes, it seems the combined pressure from customers and start‐ups is a stronger disruptive force. The quick reaction of many banks was to set up an innovation lab in order to understand and meet the demands of this “new” customer and to react to them with the speed of a start‐up. If the intention to change is not just a display of “innovation” for PR purposes, then I believe there are two key areas which should be taken into consideration if one wants to establish and run an effective innovation function:
1.
 Creativity and innovation need fertile ground to manifest themselves and the 
environment needs to be purposefully created.
2. Consistent methods for absorbing the outputs of creativity and innovation in the larger organization need to be enabled.Foundations
Early decisions in setting up an innovation function lead to different work dynamics and, as a consequence, to fundamentally different innovation outputs.
Key questions for management are:•	Do you have a vision about the level you want to play at? Globally? Nationally?
•	Are you focused on certain customer segments or products?
•	How do you want your bank to operate in five years?
•	Do you want your innovation function to explore and experiment in order to 
discover the path to that “future state”?
To illustrate the point, let me outline just two possible scenarios and how they impact the innovation function. Let us assume one bank’s view is that the world moves towards financial services being consumed as utilities, and they will provide the forever‐elusive pipes which will enable open innovation on top of its infrastructure. Another bank could hold the view that they should be your platform of choice for viewing your complete financial status through facilitating aggregation of all your financial data. These are two very different visions of the future, which both require important changes in the existing modus operandi of a retail bank. Their infrastructure does not yet have the fluidity or connectedness of the “pipes”, nor can they provide their clients with a centre of control, analytics, or contextual advice. However, the innovation function in those banks will have something in common: they focus on a future scenario, and the innovation is aligned to it strategically – see the following Figure.
An innovation lab set up on such a path of discovery would be very different from 
one with a free agenda for “experimentation”. Such innovation initiatives could be like “Google’s 20% projects” where Google employees can spend one day a week focusing on side‐projects which have the potential to bring new products to the table. These projects, while not clearly aligned to the company strategy, often end up in the company’s product portfolio.
The most common form of experimentation in financial services within innovation 
labs is with a “business‐led pipeline” or an “independent pipeline”. The first type 
EntErPrisE innovation173works with a pipeline constantly adjusted, depending on priorities and funding from 
“the business”, while in the other model the lab has decision‐making power over the priorities for experimentation, but probably less financial resources under its own control. Both types of innovation functions – let us call them “goal‐focused” and “free experimentation” – need to explicitly answer some more questions in order for them to be effective:
•	What is the bank’s appetite for disruptive innovation?
•	Do we want the lab to focus on discovering disruptive business models and 
formulate the accompanying requirements for technology delivery?
•	Or would we like the lab to focus on incremental innovation
1 supporting other 
functions like strategy and planning or architecture, which together define the path to the “future state”?The choices you make – disruptive or incremental; technology, product, service, or business model focused; betting on identity, big data, infrastructure, or blockchain – will lead to fundamentally different ways of delivering innovation – see the following Figure. One lab could be focused on disruptive product innovation using big data, while another could be focused on incremental innovation for customer experience. Both could exist within the same organization and also in parallel with free experimentation.
1 I would leave aside the discussion of whether there is such a thing as “incremental innovation”. 
I would argue in this case that the organization is looking for “creative problem solving”, not 
true innovation. See Tina Seelig, “Insight Out: Get Ideas out of Your Head and into the World” (HarperOne, 26 May 2015) for more.DEFINING
YOURINNOVATIONLAB
IS THERE A NEED
FOR INNOVATIONTO HAPPEN IN F .S.?HOWDO YOU WANTINNOVATIONTO HAPPENSTRATEGICALL YGOAL FOCUSEDPACE
DISRUPTIVE
RADICAL
INCREMENTAL
TECHNOLOGY
BUSINESS
MODEL
PRODUCT
SERVICE
BIG DATA
BLOCK CHAIN
IDENTITY
THE NEXT BIG THING...FOCUS
“BETTING”
ON
FREE
EXPERIMENTATIONTHINKAGAINYES
NO
OTHER
INDUSTRIES
ACADEMIASTART -UPSWAYS
OF WORKINGPACE:DISRUPTIVE
INCREMENTALRADICAL
“GOOGLE
20%”
LAB PIPELINE
& FUNDING
“BUSINESS
DRIVEN”“INDEPENDENT”ACCELERATORSCOLLABORATION
Figure:  Defining your innovation lab – decision treeINNOVATION LABS
FOCUS AND
APPROACH
TECHNOLOGY
TECHNOLOGY
TECHNOLOGYPRODUCT/
SERVICE
PRODUCT/
SERVICEPRODUCT/
SERVICE
FOCUSFOCUS
INNOVATION
LABFOCUSIDENTITYRUPTIVERUPTIVEDISRUPTIVE INCREMENTALBIG DATA
BUSINESS MODELCX
BUSINESS MODEL
BUSINESS
MODEL
Figure:  Innovation labs – focus and approach
For each model, there are obviously pros and cons. For an effective innovation lab, 
it is very important that the bank makes its intentions transparent to those working in the innovation function and to those using the outputs of this function, so the efforts and expectations are aligned and no resources are wasted in the decision process.
People
People are definitely the most important resource for the success of an innovation function. If you need people to deliver incremental changes along the bank’s established functions or if creators are required who can envision “new worlds”, the personalities and skills of your lab must be constructed to align with that vision. Most innovation labs I know end up, unfortunately, with a collection of the same type of people and skills and very often with too many project managers. There 174
EntErPrisE innovation174unlikely to happen within the larger organization, and allow them to feed off each 
other’s energy and ideas.
Resources
Is the innovation function a physical space, or can innovation happen through virtual collaboration?
I have seen both work. People can simply use the resources of the organization 
available for normal business (rooms, technology, and processes). There is no definite need for that shiny space, with coloured modern furniture. However, most financial services labs now have dedicated physical spaces,
2 some of them located 
with the rest of the business, and some in global tech centres. There is no “best” choice here, however there are implications. A remote location might allow the lab to develop new ways of thinking, away from the restrictions of the organization. This positive aspect can, however, be negated afterwards when the lab wants to feed back their findings. They can be perceived as out of touch with the organization, or they simply might not have the means to forge the necessary relationships with the key internal stakeholders who would be affected by their findings and need to take a decision about their innovation proposals.
What makes the actual difference to the output of a lab is what type of resources 
they have access to. Ideally, a lab would have its own infrastructure and tools. They would need collaboration tools, which enable them to communicate safely with external organizations that are very often involved in the idea development. The lab would need access to platforms where they can securely store and analyse data. Some labs developed a mini‐bank stack, to which projects connect when needed and thus the experiments are not lost, but rather they build on each other.
Access to data is essential, as the collaboration with technologists from within the 
bank in understanding how various legacy systems work is crucial. Ignoring the needs for a technical infrastructure for innovation limits considerably the scope of work and success of a lab. The results of lacking an IT lab infrastructure can be unambitious proposals which undermine the desired innovation role of the lab.should also be UX designers, the CX specialists, and people versed in strategy and formulating propositions. There should also be developers not borrowed from an agency. I would always involve architects – people who know the bank by heart and can tell you how or if a shiny new technology could be applied in the real context of that bank. Diversity is key to enabling creativity. Bring people with different professional and cultural backgrounds together; take people from other industries, younger and older generations, and veterans from within the organization.
Just because “innovation” is young and hip, your lab should not be exclusively a 
collection of young hipsters. Managing diversity and people with deep expertise is never a simple task. Whoever will manage the labs will need to nurture, not stifle the diversity, enable, not suppress critical thinking, and manage deep expertise for a common collective purpose.
Methodology
An innovation lab is a Noah’s ark of professions and specialisms. Each profession has its own methodology and language and each individual can in principal create an end-to-end solution to a problem within the confines of their specialism. However, the premise of an innovation lab hinges on the collaboration process of a cross-section of expertise. Therefore, a common “language” must be developed to allow a service designer, who has never been exposed to Financial Services, to communicate with the banking decision-makers or architects. To be clear, it is very difficult to coalesce skills and people with very different professional backgrounds – but this is precisely the combination needed for “real” innovation to happen. It is imperative, that the different voices and ideas are not silenced or suffocated. Thus, active and paramount effort must be placed and maintained in creating a communal “language” and, in turn, methodology. 
Another key dimension of diversity is melding the ways of working in the start-ups 
and enterprise environments. The lab exists within the remand of the enterprise but has to deliver like a start-up. Therefore, it is acutely important that the lab methodology enables both “ways of working”. 
If you choose Design Thinking, Lean or Agile Methods, or if you develop your own 
method – train the whole team. Do not let them play by the ear. Simply put, through the common methodology, you initiate interactions between specialisms that are 
2 “Peek Inside 7 of The Banking World’s Coolest Innovation Labs”, The Financial Brand, 8 June 
2015, http://thefinancialbrand.com/52177/7‐of‐the‐coolest‐innovation‐labs‐in‐banking/.
EntErPrisE innovation175Governance
“Innovation governance” is much misunderstood, by people from both inside and 
outside the banking world. Outsiders often look puzzled. “What is it to govern here?” (see the following Figure). This shows, however, a lack of understanding of how a bank works. As a heavily regulated industry, needing to operate 24/7 without fault, while dealing with highly sensitive data, banks function according to strictly governed processes and rules. Insiders and especially the guardians of governance would say on the other hand that everybody, including the innovation function, would need to respect the same rules as the rest of the bank. This is not true for many reasons. Innovation projects have a very different purpose and lifecycle than the business‐as‐usual projects: they might not use live client data; most often they do not connect to the productive infrastructure or do not have a chance of “going live” in their respective set‐up.
Most of the bank’s governing rules have evolved over the years from the era of a 
paper‐based business and nine‐to‐five opening hours, before the cloud or cyber‐security threats existed. Financial institutions are now a mixture of old and new, trying to cover all aspects of risks. They were, however, not defined for the case where somebody in the bank wants to experiment a bit, connect and combine technologies, or use client data for live testing.If you want to repetitively but rapidly set up proofs of concept which use a new technology, real data, and are tested by bank clients, the rules of such engagements need to be formally defined. It is not “blank sheet” governance as some imagine, which allows experimentation within the bank, but precisely the opposite. The governance should contain a clear definition of what the innovation function needs to do in order to have access to resources and what experts and governing bodies it needs to consult in order to make sure the data is not compromised and large risks are not created through experimentation.
Innovation “Consumption”
While in the pharmaceutical, technology, and energy industries R&D and innovation functions are by definition at the heart of their competitive edge, financial services have neither the culture nor the experience of setting up innovation functions and absorbing their products. There are countless stories of missed opportunities, too painful to hear: Xerox not knowing what to do with Alto, IBM letting go of the SAP founders … the list goes on. This is why I think right now it is more important than ever for the financial sector to genuinely learn how to incorporate innovation, otherwise the future will slip straight through their fingers.
What outputs does one expect to see from the bank’s innovation function?If a bank sets up a lab with a mandate for disruptive innovation focused on the use 
of data with big data technology, one would expect in a certain timeframe to clarify some real opportunities and choices of technologies which the bank will follow up on, given its expressed view that the bank will create business value out of data. If, however, the innovation function does not have a clear mandate, but delivers experiments in response to a varied set of business questions, the output would be just that: a set of answers to those questions only. It is thus very important to align the way the innovation lab functions with the type of output the bank expects to get.
Most of the outputs from a typical bank innovation lab could be included in one of 
the categories below:
•	New feature(s) of an existing product and/or platform (e.g. web, mobile)
•	New product
Figure:  Author’s Twitter feed 
Source: Twitter Feed from Private Twitter account from the Author and a contact, 23 June 2015
176
EntErPrisE innovation176•	Identification of new technology or combination of technologies for a specific use 
case
•	Improved Customer Experience (CX) journey for a particular product or channel
•	Industry trends
•	Strategy reports
•	FinTech scouting and news
•	New business models.
There are many ways, of course, to measure the success of an innovation lab. In my view, that success is by no means represented by the delivery of many experiments, but rather by the delivery of the relevant information to the relevant people in the organization in such a way that enables them to take decisions, adopt the solution proposed, or learn from the tests performed in the lab. Without enabling the handshake between the innovation lab and the larger organization, the organization as a whole will waste resources and, more importantly, lose valuable opportunities.
Can the handshakes between the lab and the larger organization be predefined?I strongly believe they should. In some cases the lab could search a while for 
the relevant stakeholders for their particular findings. However, in most cases, depending on the type of output, the clients, the audience, and the mechanisms to promote and distribute the innovation can be predetermined. The following Figure gives some examples of how typical lab outputs need to be handed-off in order to be converted into genuine action.So, you still think an innovation lab is the answer?
My advice:•	It is not one lab but many labs – set up focused labs, but also allow free 
experimentation in the organization.
•	Innovation governance is not a “blank sheet” as many believe, but a clear and simple framework which allows the lab to function creatively and have rapid access to resources (people, infrastructure, data, etc.) in a highly regulated world, which functions at a different tempo. Make sure you have a framework in place from the beginning and keep it updated and relevant.
•	Find, retain, and nurture people knowledgeable and passionate about their field of expertise, who are not put off by repeated trial and error and problem reframing, but who, on the other hand, thrive on challenges. Nurture them. Find that leader who loves the “nerds” and knows how to create the environment which allows them to work at their best.
•	Diversity creates fertile ground for creativity – do not go for a lab staffed only with young, white, male hipsters who all know “agile” and “Ruby on Rails”. Do not ignore the hard technical skills, or you end up with too much PowerPoint material. Do not forget innovation needs must be fed back into the organization and somebody needs to speak the language of the organization in order to be able to advocate for the required changes.
•	Do not focus only on the tip of the iceberg. Innovation in banking focuses very much at the moment on the visible part of banking – a new feature in the app, on the web, or a brightly coloured branch with modern furniture. If you assess the content of most of the FinTech conferences around the world, the ideas presented attack the visible business model or the presentation layer of the banking world. For those who understand how a bank works, this is just the tip of the iceberg. Where is innovation in Assets & Liability Management, or Treasury, or even Regulatory Reporting? All these functions continue to be delivered in silos and in the “old ways”.
•	Changes in the deep layers of the bank would have a massive impact in the way a bank functions and would surface immediately in better CX, better products 
New feature(s) of an existing product and/or
platform (e.g web, mobile) New productNew technology(incremental change)If adopted, these will bedelivered throughchange/transformationprogrammes
Require regular C-level discussions
followed by possible redefinition ofpriorities and scope of change. Mightinform investment decisions.
The most radical output for
innovation could lead to thedevelopment of an entire new stackfor the delivery of a new brand.Strategy reportsT rendsStart-up scoutingNew technology (disruptive potential)New business model (disruptive potential)
New Business ModelFROM OUTPUT TO ACTION
Figure:  From output to action
EntErPrisE innovation177and services. What sort of lab allows experimentation in the core of the bank? 
How can we allow for experimentation of the incredibly powerful combination of hardware and software, which transform and disrupt all industries? This is the type of change I strongly believe in and I hope to see and contribute to in the years to come.The ultimate “innovation lab” in my view would deliver an in‐house full‐scale “challenger bank”. With the budget of yet another massive transformation programme, instead of trying to add a layer of polish to systems on life support, the banks have the option to build their own challenger banks. The customer in search of a better proposition would, as before, migrate. But at least now, they will be able to migrate inside your bank.
178
EntErPrisE innovation178FinTechs and Banks – 
Collaboration is Key
By Bjoern Erik Juengerkes 
Head of Business Development, biw AG
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA) with Dwolla, Royal Bank of Scotland with 
Funding Circle, National Australian Bank with Bugwolf, Wirecard Bank with Holvi and Number26, biw AG with auxmoney, fashioncheque, and others. These are just a few examples of collaborations between banks and FinTechs that have emerged over the last two years.
In earlier times, also retrospectively referred to as FinTech 1.0, FinTechs took a 
very radical and disruptive approach aiming to replace banks and established financial systems. Young and entrepreneurial start‐ups have since tried to close the gap between the “dusty” service offerings of incumbent banks and customer needs. Using innovative digital technologies, they intend to improve customer experience, to streamline processes, and to more efficiently offer a wide variety of financial products and services such as investments, lending, payments, and remittances.
Things have changed and, meanwhile, an increasing number of FinTechs 
collaborate with banks. Experience from partnerships with several European FinTechs has shown that for FinTechs to succeed, it might be worthwhile thinking twice whether to disrupt or to collaborate.
Partnerships between start‐ups and traditional companies are not new. 
Since barriers to entry in financial services, set among others by regulatory standards, have traditionally been very high, start‐ups so far largely avoided this segment
Experience with several European FinTechs has shown that FinTechs and banks 
can collaborate at different stages of development. There are many reasons for both parties to do so, with the right partner, good preparation and the necessary openness towards the other party’s requirements.
1 See Funding Circle 2015, available at https://www.fundingcircle.com/uk.
2 See Dwolla 2015, available from https://www.dwolla.com.
3 See Number26 2015, About Number26, available at https://number26.de/en/support/
number26‐partner‐bank‐2 and Holvi 2015, Customer Support, available at https://support.holvi.
com/hc/en‐us/articles/201434362‐Making‐payments‐to‐Holvi.
4 See Savedo 2015, AGB, available at https://www.savedo.de/agb and Zinspilot 2015, Ueber 
uns, available at https://www.zinspilot.de/de/ueberuns.
5 Lending Club 2015, About us, available at https://www.lendingclub.com/public/lending‐
club‐press‐2014‐05‐05.action.Collaborating Makes Sense  
for Both FinTechs and Banks
Collaborations between FinTech companies and banks can take different forms. 
Some FinTechs are bound to services that can only be offered by those holding a banking licence. Hence, they either need to apply for the licence themselves, or enter into a strategic partnership with a regulated partner, a bank. Funding Circle went its own way. In the UK, it is regulated by the FCA.
1 Others, such as Dwolla 
(Veridian Credit Union, USA),2 Number26 or Holvi (Wirecard Bank, Germany)3 
and Savedo or Zinspilot (biw AG, Germany)4 have partnered with banks.
Some FinTechs focus on bank partnerships in order to enlarge their customer base and at the same time enrich the product and service offering of the respective bank (e.g. Lending Club and Union Bank, USA).
5
Unrelated to the stage in which FinTechs and banks engage in a partnership, both bring valuable assets to the table. FinTechs are tech‐driven, test new technologies, and explore what is technically possible, not being bound to legacy systems. Applying innovative concepts, they create an enormous number of ideas in a very agile way. On top of this, FinTech entrepreneurs innately use social media technologies to support their work, from idea finding to consumer contact after launch.
Banks are usually risk‐averse and act much more slowly due to their regulatory 
boundaries and their liabilities. Their banking capabilities allow them to open accounts, hold money, give out credit, and offer other regulated products 
EntErPrisE innovation179and services. Further, they can add their industry expertise, regulatory, legal, 
compliance, and risk management know‐how and can give FinTechs access to global payment systems as well as their own customer base. Overall, they can lower the barriers of entry for FinTech firms into the financial services space and provide customers in a partnership with an increased level of trust.
Together, FinTechs and banks create an ecosystem that allows them to better fulfil 
client needs and close the gap between the services offered by traditional banks and actual customer demands.
Needs for a Collaboration
FinTechs have to choose the right partners and prepare wisely for their partnerships. Depending on a FinTech’s needs and its status, partnership choices are different.
Setting up a business requires in‐depth preparation and, at a certain point, a 
decision whether to look out for a partner or go it alone. Experience shows that the point of approaching potential partners needs to be well chosen and prepared. Selling into banks – no matter whether it is a partnership required to run the business, or to accelerate and grow the business – is very often a long‐lasting process. And it is not a straightforward process either. Due to generally high investment costs, great business risk, and the need for strategic fit, banks choose their FinTech partners wisely, applying similar criteria to those on which venture capitalists base their investment decisions.
FinTechs that are already operative need to make the choice whether a partnership 
will accelerate growth or whether it is wiser to continue to approach the market alone. There are no hard decision criteria and, in the end, as in every partnership, it is a choice about whether to stay independent and take a longer and harder way to grow your business, or to partner and potentially compromise. Many FinTechs that have reached a critical mass to operate their business models are meanwhile approached by banks in a search for innovative solutions to enhance the banks’ product and service portfolios. In consumer‐oriented business models, one can find partnerships based on referral agreements such as that of Santander with UK‐based Funding Circle and Crowdfunder.co.uk.
6 Other business models show full integration of services, 
such as the integration of document analysis and semantic technology services of the German FinTech GINI into the online banking front end of Deutsche Bank.
7
FinTechs still in their set‐up phase need to respect both regulatory requirements and the nature of their business model in a decision to go for, or without, a partner.
As fully regulated entities, banks can support FinTechs to manage regulatory 
requirements. FinTechs have to be aware that, depending on the partnership, they can still offer their services under their brand; however, the bank as a regulated entity is (also) in almost all cases a contracting partner to the customer.
8 This set‐up 
is completely independent of which entity maintains the client contact, does the marketing and sales, or provides the service with its IT system. A good example of a FinTech that has partnered with banks for regulatory reasons is auxmoney, a German online marketplace for P2P lending that acts as an agent and has partnered with two banks, for regulatory purposes.
9
Different Banks, Different Benefits
In searching for a partner, it is important to differentiate between retail and transaction or specialized banks, as both types have different needs and wants, and both can be attractive for a FinTech company, depending on a FinTech’s development stage and focus.
Retail Banks
Partnerships with retail banks usually take place once the FinTech has set up its business and wants to rapidly enlarge its customer base, increase customer trust, and/or the retail banks intend to enrich their product and service portfolio. There is currently a huge appetite from retail banks to cooperate with FinTechs. However, there are also numerous retail banks that believe they can innovate by themselves, or others that simply ignore the trend or still resist hooking up as second movers.
6 Santander 2015, Alternative funding, available at http://www.santander.co.uk/uk/business/
alternative‐sources‐of‐finance.
7 Available at https://www.gini.net/en/b2c/.
8 Concept called “Co‐” or “white” labelling.
9 Auxmoney 2015, FAQ, available at https://www.auxmoney.com/faq/anleger.180
EntErPrisE innovation180An existing customer base is attractive if FinTechs can use it in the way they would 
like to run their business. Once they have reached a certain market position, access to larger banks is much easier, and so is their negotiation position when it comes to using the customer base and making the bank’s customers also the FinTech’s customers (with all the rights attached to this from the corporation’s point of view). As long as a start‐up is small, it is very often faced with resistance on questions such as “Who owns the customer?”
Partnerships with retail banks are not always easy, as most retail banks lack open 
infrastructures, use legacy systems, and are still, despite an official willingness to open up to digitalization and innovation, slow movers. Very often, there is also political resistance, which makes FinTechs selling into retail banks difficult and time‐consuming. The higher IT integration is, the more new products and services compete with existing ones, and the more difficult it is to successfully initiate a partnership.
Transaction or Specialized Banks (Including 
Challenger Banks)
Partnerships with transaction or specialized banks are of importance in setting up 
a business model, in case regulation requires licences to operate the business. Usually these banks do not focus, or only to a lesser extent, on end clients and are instead focused on corporate clients such as distribution partners or sales agents that maintain client relationships. Many of the transaction banks, which have opened up to FinTechs, have agreed on cooperative partnerships, offer their partners co‐ or white‐label services, act in a way which is more similar to start‐ups than regular retail banks, and have created open infrastructures that allow easy interfacing. In Germany, we see three banks front‐running in FinTech start‐ups. Two of them, biw AG and Wirecard Bank AG, are pure transaction banks that white‐label their services to their partners.
10
Selling into bank partnerships is often very time‐consuming. With increasing size, decision processes in banks become immensely lengthy. To avoid being stalled, FinTechs need to be well prepared and, ideally, analyse organization and decision processes on the partner side up front:•	How is my desired partner organized, i.e. who benefits from the partnership, who does not, and what needs to be done to foster decision‐making?
•	How are decisions made, i.e. am I talking to the right people, who is making decisions – a single person or a committee?
Sometimes it might not be wise to talk to the CEO first. However, it is useful to approach a person such as the Treasurer first, as they might benefit most from the desired partnership. For decision‐making, it is thereafter sensible to build up a relationship with the decision‐making bodies.
Into the Collaboration – Avoid 
Frictions
Partnerships between FinTechs and traditional banks are special, as partners 
with completely different backgrounds, risk appetites, and liabilities intend to work and function together. In particular, for collaborations that are necessary to run the business, it is of the utmost importance to get a good understanding of the other party’s mind‐set, its goals, and restrictions up front. Expectations and common guidelines should be set very early in the partnership. FinTechs need to understand why traditional banks do not develop at the speed of the start‐up, demand certain security levels when it comes to IT systems, have publishing restrictions, to mention only a few of the topics that very often lead to frictions. All of this may seem trivial, but experience shows that FinTech/bank partnerships that are not well prepared can lead to great dissatisfaction and at worst to a termination of the partnership.
Why Collaborate at All?
If a FinTech can replicate the bank’s IT, if it has enough money to set aside for the bank’s equity capital and can convince the regulator to get the approval for a banking licence, if it believes customer trust is not an issue since its (new) brand is trustworthy enough and is convinced it can attract enough customers on its own, it should start its business without entering into a partnership. If this is too time‐consuming and complex, it should look for the right banking partner.
10 See http://paymentandbanking.com/2015/05/17/cooperations‐between‐banks‐and‐fintechs‐
in‐ger‐17‐05‐2015.
EntErPrisE innovation181Outlook
Partnerships between start‐ups and traditional organizations such as those 
between FinTechs and banks are not new. Other industries have seen them much earlier and have demonstrated how relationships develop. While banks have been very reluctant to move into the FinTech space in the first place, the number of collaborations between FinTechs and banks has meanwhile increased enormously worldwide. There is no doubt that the financial services industry will be disrupted in the same way as other industries beforehand. Partnerships and collaborations between existing and new players are key to ending up on the winning side.
11
11 For example BBVA acquired online bank Simple in early 2014. Simple 2014, Company News, 
available at https://www.simple.com/blog/the‐next‐chapter.182
EntErPrisE innovation182Partnerships Are the Key  
to Addressing Financial  and Digital Exclusion
By Marc Lien 
Director of Innovation & Digital Development,  Lloyds Banking Group
and Nick Williams
Consumer Digital Director, Lloyds Banking Group
It is an exciting time to be involved in FinTech, and at Lloyds Banking Group we are 
determined to play a big role in the FinTech ecosystem, by engaging in debate, contributing to continual innovation, and investing in its future. The face of the banking industry has changed, with customers now choosing to bank in new ways at a time and place that suits them. Finance has had to adapt to keep up with rapidly accelerating customer and technology‐driven trends to enable customers and communities to benefit. The power of digital can bring increased prosperity to individuals and organizations that harness its potential. Conversely, it can work against those who are left behind, either due to a lack of basic digital skills, or a poor understanding of online opportunities (the “digitally excluded”), or those who are unable to make use of core banking services (the “financially excluded”).
There is a growing risk that digital exclusion is leading to financial exclusion. We 
know some low‐income families are without a bank account and they risk paying a “poverty premium” because they don’t make their regular payments using direct debit or standing orders, for example. Perhaps more surprising are the findings of a recent Halifax survey that shows customers who are able to manage their money more regularly and more easily online have more than double the amount of savings and are less likely to go into unplanned overdrafts.
By opening up the power of digital to everyone in the UK, we can tackle digital and 
financial exclusion head‐on. At our organization, we are extending an open invitation to the FinTech community to join forces with us so that the FinTech revolution does not just result in private gain, but in the shared legacy of a fully inclusive and digitally and financially savvy society that contributes to everyone’s wellbeing.
1 Started in 2014, the Lloyds Bank UK Business Digital Index uses detailed analysis of small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs) and charities to understand how they use and feel about digital 
technology.The Financial and Digital Inclusion 
Imperative
Many of our personal, business, and not‐for‐profit customers are already taking 
advantage of the power of digital. However, over ten million adults and more than one million small businesses and charities in the UK are not only missing out on the benefits of digital, but are at risk of being left behind and excluded from a society that will in the future have digital at its heart. Our own research, conducted as part of the 2015 Lloyds Bank UK Business Digital Index,
1 shows that, on average, 
organizations that adopt the power of digital have a more confident outlook, gain access to wider markets, and are one‐third more likely to have reported an increase in their turnovers in the last two years, than the least digitally mature organizations.
Banks and FinTech communities can and must work together to reduce exclusion. 
Some progress has been made, as we will see below, but there is much more for us to do.
About Us
Our day‐to‐day relationships with our customers are evolving, not because their financial needs are fundamentally changing, but because they want to interact with us in different ways. Their expectations of how we should serve them are being set by how the best businesses in the world harness digital. For this reason, digital sits at the heart of our strategy and underpins our overall mission to help Britain prosper.
You can now order a taxi, jump into it, and get out the other end without even 
reaching into your pocket for a wallet. That sets the bar for all organizations, not least our industry. Customers choose to bank digitally because it’s simpler and easier; it allows them to transact when and where they want.
For this reason, we have established a transformation programme to improve our 
own digital products and services and help ensure we are being digitally inclusive for all our customers.
EntErPrisE innovation183Our Digital Transformation
As a Digital 100 Leader, our guiding principle is simple: it is to be where our 
customers want us to be. Only four years ago, none of our customers was using a mobile banking app. Today we have six million active mobile users and for many of these customers mobile is their main way to get online. In the past 12 months alone, our 11 million digital customers have logged on to our secure site 1.3 billion times, while transactions totalling £2.2 trillion were made through our commercial online channels in 2014 – that is not far off the UK’s entire GDP.
In 2014, more than 40% of our customers’ new product needs, such as current 
accounts, personal loans, or credit cards, were fulfilled via digital. To keep up with this shift in customer preference, we deliver enhanced propositions and experiences to our customers every month. To truly be effective in a more digital world, we realize that we cannot stop there. We are reinventing the core services that we provide for our customers by starting afresh with the sole objective of designing brilliant experiences that meet our customers’ needs. Digital is no longer the domain of a few people within our Group – it is everyone’s job. The same is true of innovation. Our journey has taken us from talking about digital, to digitizing the channel, to digitizing the bank, to digital being in our very DNA.
One key part of our digital progress in this era of rapid and pervasive change has 
been creating a digital platform that allows us to quickly innovate both internally and with the FinTech community. We have invested £750m over the past three years in a single digital architecture that provides consistency and resilience across all desktop, mobile, branch, and telephony touchpoints.
This investment is important, but to create a culture of experimentation and to drive 
innovation across the Group we have also set up LBG Innovation Labs to constantly test new ideas and concepts. More than 50 innovation ideas have been built and tested with customers this year alone and many of these are, or soon will be, with our 11 million digital users. We have created a safe controlled environment where it is “okay to fail” and we can test quickly. As a result, we have sped up the customer feedback cycle and we are helping the business de‐risk future investments.
We are the first major bank to have a Digital Division reporting directly into the 
Group CEO, centred around a specialist digital hub housing 1,200 colleagues in London. This division has a mandate not just to focus on digital performance and delivery for the Group, but to be a catalyst for change for the entire organization, facilitating our ambition to be the best bank for customers in the digital age.
Our Digital Future
We believe opening up the power of digital to everyone is a key element of achieving our mission of “helping Britain prosper”. In the next three years we are investing a further £1bn in digital, on top of our investment in IT resiliency, to transform ten customer journeys across physical and digital touchpoints. We are starting with a clean sheet and a simple question: what will “brilliant” look like for our customers?
We can and will make digital more accessible for all our customers and one way 
we are directly doing this is by committing 20,000 Digital Champions, recruited from Lloyds Banking Group colleagues, by 2017. These Digital Champions pledge to actively help customers, friends, and family to get more out of being online by helping them to understand the benefits of the internet and inspiring them to increase their basic digital skills.
Our Digital Champions initiative was launched as part of our commitment to the 
digital skills charity Go ON UK, whose vision is to empower all people, small businesses, and charities across the UK to reach their digital potential. Go ON UK works in partnership to achieve digital inclusion and Lloyds Banking Group is proud to be a founding partner and board member. One of the many exciting projects on which we are collaborating is the creation of the new Lloyds Bank Digital Index, which will provide a measure of basic digital skills and map the links between digital and financial exclusion.
While we are determined to seize opportunities such as these to make digital 
accessible to all, it is the collective  power of banks, with their regular and frequent 
interactions with millions of people and organizations across the UK, and the entrepreneurial drive and technological expertise of the FinTech community, that will ultimately help maximize the potential of digital. For this to be truly achieved, we must collaborate – and do so in a way that is inclusive to everyone.184
EntErPrisE innovation184Collaborative Partnerships  
are the Key to Digital and  Financial Inclusion
FinTech points the way to our digital future and we need to nurture and harness 
the creative and visionary power of FinTech through strategic partnerships, collaborations, sponsorship, and championing of the ecosystem. Lloyds Banking Group is mobilizing around FinTech and we are already reaching out through partnerships such as the one with Startupbootcamp FinTech Accelerator, where we were involved in launching the first Global FinTech Insurance Accelerator programme.
We are also delighted to be a founding member of Innovate Finance, a new trade 
body for technological innovators working to support the FinTech ecosystem in the UK. We supported Innovate Finance’s London Tech Week, which brought together key players and influencers. London is the best place for FinTech start‐ups and the city is the top location for FinTech job creation,
2 at a time when financial services 
is alight with innovation. With FinTech generating over £20bn for the UK economy and a half of all investments in Europe being taken by the UK, it is a great time to be part of such an important movement.
We joined forces with Innovate UK, the Government’s Technology Strategy Board, 
and four other partners to launch the first FinTech Open Innovation challenge to the start‐up community. The challenge was: “How can digital innovation be used to improve financial literacy and help people better manage their finances for themselves and their families?” What we were looking for was a start‐up that would improve financial literacy and skills among consumers in an engaging and intuitive way, making a real difference to people’s lives.Small businesses and start‐ups are well placed to explore financial innovations and tackle the types of issues we pose through the Innovate UK challenges. Lloyds Banking Group can provide these FinTech companies with access to 11 million online customers who can benefit from this kind of innovation. The synergies and mutual benefits from such sustainable partnerships are plain to see – we are not only using our digital platform to innovate for our customers, we are collectively raising the level of our ambition to make a more profound and lasting impact.
The Opportunity to Work Together
Technology is driving changes in how we work, how we bank, and how we live our lives. Many individuals and organizations are already harnessing the power of digital. Others are either unable to, due to lack of knowledge or expertise, or they are simply unaware of the opportunities passing them by. We cannot tolerate digital exclusion and allow anyone to fall behind. For the sake of our citizens and businesses, our economy, and the future prosperity of our country, we must develop high digital capability throughout our society.
Lloyds Banking Group can and will play an important role in helping provide 
the necessary access to digital, but to harness its full power and make a lasting impact, organizations such as ours and the FinTech community must combine their strengths and work in close partnerships. Only by working hand in glove can we tackle digital exclusion and create a lasting societal legacy for everyone in the UK. We want to be part of the movement and we invite you to join us because we know the best ideas come from collaboration.
Let’s work together.
2 Source: startupbootcamp FinTech Trend Report 2014. London has surpassed New York and 
Silicon Valley for FinTech job creation, with 44,000 specialist roles in the City of London alone.
EntErPrisE innovation185Corporate Venture Capital   –   
The New Power Broker in the 
FinTech Innovation Ecosystem
By Nicole Anderson 
CEO, FINTECH Circle Innovate
“In an economy where innovation spells the difference between success and failure, 
corporate venturing can spur tomorrow’s innovations while it helps build an organization in which innovation is business as usual.”
Boston Consulting Group, October 2012 
1
Corporate Venture Capital (CVC) is not synonymous with, but rather a specific 
subset of, Venture Capital. How capital is mobilized and managed for return varies considerably across company investor profiles. The coming of age of the “corporate investor” in FinTech is some way off, but if deployed strategically in support of innovation, CVC becomes a real contender in the investor landscape. Lessons learned from other industries can be applied. FinTech is high‐octane and an emerging segment in its own right. It calls for speed and agile sourcing in a global marketplace. The challenge is simple – the CVC function often needs to undertake its own attempt at re‐invention. How the Corporate Venture Division is structured, its evolving culture and skills all play a role in its future success.
There is an increased amount of funds focusing on FinTech globally. In exchange 
for the high return that venture capitalists assume by investing in smaller and less mature companies, they usually get significant control over company decisions and a significant portion of the company’s ownership (and consequent value).
Corporate venture is much more varied in its approach to investing, given the 
differences in drivers and measures of success. The typical drivers behind corporate investment mandate are:
1 Boston Consulting Group, “Corporate Venture Capital: Avoid the Risk, Miss the Rewards”, 
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/innovation_growth_mergers_acquisitions_
corporate_venture_capital/?chapter=5.•	Strategy – to advance the future vision of the enterprise;
•	Expansion – to extend the company’s portfolio of products and services;
•	Innovation – to improve the competitive position and enhance customer 
experience or take strategic bets;
•	Finance – to improve the financial return of the company
In 2014, 40 CVCs invested in a combination of venture capital funds and accelerators, equating to over $29 billion. In the same year, at least 10 CVCs had fund sizes exceeding $250 million.
2
Whilst 2014 was a big year for corporate‐backed exits, with the US enjoying two‐thirds of the market value, one of the major revelations was that corporate funding was fast becoming the most active “seed‐to‐series A cliff” player with a whopping 212 first‐round (series A) deals in a single year.
3
The momentum is set to continue. VC firms and CVCs continue to align in co‐investing and, while committed capital in VC firms is contracting, corporate venture is growing. More large corporates understand the potential for sustainable business returns and competitiveness by blending corporate venture strategy to innovation acceleration priorities. Considering the benefits venture investing offers, the real question is whether corporations can afford not to join the game.
CVC and the Opportunity for the 
FinTech Ecosystem
Dozens of banks and financial services companies are already committing to “seed 
investing” and many more are sponsoring large FinTech accelerators around the world. The “David and Goliath” connection is proving itself out in the search for strategic gains and predictable returns. It is very early days.
2 Nicole Anderson: https://medium.com/the‐fintech‐book/corporate‐venture‐the‐new‐power‐
broker‐in‐the‐fintech‐innovation‐ecosystem‐21bdfbad4ccb; Global Corporate Venturing Annual 
Report – June 2015 .
3 The Economist (2015).186
EntErPrisE innovation186In an attempt to get “closer to the innovation ecosystem”, some tier 1 players have 
launched high profile labs – BBVA, Capital One, Wells Fargo, Deutsche Bank, UBS, etc. – whilst others have opted to sponsor accelerators such as Lloyds and Barclays.
The budgets for these activities are impressive, with the average lab costing an 
average of $2 million to launch.
4 The focus on attracting start‐ups to showcase, 
cohort, and collaborate has meant that millions have been spent on the infrastructure, hiring key talent, and leveraging the “benefit” of the positive PR.
Switching to the high‐profile CVC investments such as Goldman Sachs (OnDeck, 
Kensho), JP Morgan (Prosper, Motif Investing, Square), Citi (Square, Betterment, Platfora), HSBC (Kyriba), BBVA (Simple), Mastercard (iZettle), and AmEx (SumUp, LearnVest), there is little evidence to suggest corporate strategy has caught up or is supported by innovation and investment mandates. They are almost, for now, separate worlds.
Accelerating Open Innovation in 
FinTech
The need to innovate is impacting dozens of product and service areas across 
the financial services supply chain. Jamie Dimon, CEO of JP Morgan Chase, was famously quoted as saying: “Silicon Valley is coming. There are hundreds of start‐ups with a lot of brains and money working on various alternatives to traditional banking.”
5
Lloyd Blankfein, CEO of Goldman Sachs, has publicly confirmed that he fully expects that “partnerships, acquisitions and competition will be the key to the way the vertical develops”.
6 If you marry the pace of innovation to the potential of business disruption, the enterprise has to act quickly. The rules of the game have changed and the once privileged position of building internally and staying competitive are flawed models to a successful future.
The partnership needed between heads of innovation, corporate venture, the 
CTO office, and risk and compliance are all essential in searching for and shaping deals, working with business units, defining measures of success, and ultimately supporting the change in cultural appetite for risk and willingness to test, trial, and collaborate with the outside world.
Investment sustainability takes planning and an appetite for risk. It also requires 
patience and embedded margin for “error”.
For those FinTech‐focused CVCs who understand the power of portfolio 
management
  –  targeting early‐stage, higher‐risk deal flow, but balancing that out 
with later‐stage, lower‐risk in‐sourcing of technology – stand a greater chance of repeatable future returns.
Setting up for Success
Ask any Head of Innovation at a bank how they are measured and how this aligns with other business units/functions, and the answers are likely to be just as varied as the individuals being asked the question.
If you turn to the CVC arm, many are under‐resourced and desperately need 
augmentation from experienced venture and innovation professionals working with them, and in the key global locations. Past processes and measures are unlikely to meet the needs for now and the future.
The internal collaboration and fusion of planning between innovation and 
investment functions is vital. Structure, relationship to parent/enterprise, talent/skills, approach to portfolio management, and venture philosophy are all vital areas to assess. Challenging each element is necessary – and some of the key questions need to be asked – these are sampled in the following Table.
4 Forbes, “FinTech Startup Labs on Growth Path from London to Hong Kong”, September 2014; 
Accenture, “The Rise of FinTech, New York’s Opportunity for Tech Leadership 2014”.
5 Jamie Dimon, A Letter to Shareholders, http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/ONE/15660259
x0x820077/8af78e45‐1d81‐4363‐931c‐439d04312ebc/JPMC‐AR2014‐LetterToShareholders.pdf.
6 John Seward, “Is There Technological Turmoil in the Financial Services Industry?”, Benzinga, 
14 March 2015, http://www.benzinga.com/analyst‐ratings/analyst‐color/15/03/5326198/is‐there‐
technological‐turmoil‐in‐the‐financial‐services#ixzz3hG7UJcfV.
EntErPrisE innovation187Table:  Key questions for success
Structure Relationship with Parent Talent/Skills  Portfolio Management Ventures
•	How has the Corporate 
Ventures Function (CVF) been set up?
•	Strategic Goals – financial/strategic – what is the proper balance?
•	Measures of success (KPIs)?
•	Governance structure?
•	Composition of investment committee and advisory board? •	How do you set expectations for results?
•	How do you ensure fast decision‐making?
•	How do you get involvement of business groups (BGs) in the process?
•	How to keep the parent company and BGs involved in CVF’s activities?
•	How do you bring portfolio companies into the parent and BGs?•	Partner/Managing Director profiles?
•	Size of team and profiles, outside hires vs. internal knowledge?
•	Compensation and implications on acceptance CVF by organization?
•	VC reward policy or Corporate reward policy? •	How do you get access to the best deal opportunities?
•	Deal flow funnel?
•	Board/observer seats in ventures?
•	What does CVC offer the companies and co‐investors? •	How do you build your reputation in the ecosystem?
•	What stages do you invest – seed, A, B, C?
•	How do you generate a high quality deal pipeline?
•	Majority/minority stake?
•	Do you co‐invest in syndicates?
Moreover, the role of the CVC function needs to act and move more like a VC to support the innovation strategy. Many argue that CVFs can be more successful, if placed outside the organization under the governance of an investment committee.
Table:  Guidelines for setting up an external CVF
Structure•	A clear investment focus essential
•	Tenure – needs to be long‐term – investments need time to mature
•	Efficient investment process to keep up with market speed
•	Success metrics covering financial and strategic elements
•	Location close to corporate office or major business groups for internal  networkingVentures•	Minority stakes are most common
•	Co‐investment options should be the norm
•	Board/observer seat in venture and involvement in major decisions
•	Active support of portfolio companies
•	Stable and consistent network in venture ecosystem
•	Reputation and track record is key for ensuring quality deal flow
Relationship to Parent•	CVF should have broad and resilient network within parent and business groups (BGs)
•	Dialogue between CVF with BGs and Corporate Centre needs to be systematic
•	Early BG involvement during investment process
•	Portfolio companies need regular exposure to BGsTalent/Skills•	Team size for fund: 5–8
•	Employees representing a mix of VC and internal background (50/50)
•	Match CVC comp packages to those of VCs A balance has to be struck in such a model. The considerations are many, but building on the above, some guidelines for setting up an external CVF (sponsored by a corporate parent) would be found in the Table below.188
EntErPrisE innovation188FinTech CVC – Lessons to Live By
CVC should be a true business partner both to its internal stakeholders and to its 
investment portfolio companies. It should blend internal investment skills with the best industry standards in corporate venture funding. It needs to strike the balance between strategic and financial returns, working always to balance portfolio risk in either discreet investments or co‐investments, but never alienated from the innovation agenda or group strategy.The cost of venturing is considerable. However, the rate of change of innovation makes it an obvious choice given that inactivity can be more costly. The time is now for FinTech to create a perfect storm for corporate venture to be the new power broker in the innovation ecosystem.
EntErPrisE innovation189The Insurance Opportunity
By Péter Orlovácz 
Former Head of Digital, AXA Bank Europe
Insurance is a massive 4.64 trillion‐dollar industry, yet most of the focus within 
FinTech has been on banking (investments and lending) and payments. The issues faced by customers from the insurance sector are very similar to those of banks, i.e. sub‐par customer service, opaque pricing, and complicated products. The trends of digitization, new distribution models, and transparency that gave birth to many FinTech start‐ups also apply to the insurance world.
Distribution
People are less inclined to buy insurance themselves, instead engaging with agents who will typically approach the customer and “push their products”. This has largely shaped distribution into an agent‐broker type model where the agent’s role is more about sales.
As digital alternatives shape customer needs and behaviour, it is distribution which 
tends to change first. Advances in technology and insurers’ desire to get closer to customers (to better capture data and provide a more consistent customer experience) have started to change the distribution model, but the emergence of digital distribution will change it even more. In addition, distribution poses some of the largest costs for modern insurers. Some insurance carriers started direct distribution, especially for simpler, one‐off products like travel and motor insurance. Very few, however, went all‐in on direct insurance, fearing competition with their own agent networks. As a solution to this classic innovator’s dilemma, some of them have branded their direct offer differently as “modified pricing and products” to ensure agents will not be too negatively affected. This relationship is quite similar to how banks feel about their branches. Agent networks too will also need to find their added value in addition to sales.
One of the most significant technology‐driven disruptions in distribution has been 
the rise of aggregators
 , which are websites that compare quotes from multiple 
insurance providers. These are most developed in the United Kingdom and other advanced European markets, but some companies have started to do the same thing in the United States – Google is one of them. Aggregator sites started with simpler products like motor and travel insurance. Looking towards expansion, their big challenge is to find new products where customers can be self‐directed. For this, they will need either simpler products, requiring fewer data points for the underwriting algorithm, or to find a way to provide better user experience – either by using public data or proprietary information the insurer already has to help customers obtain their insurance. Another way of expansion for comparison sites is vertical; to turn into highly personal advisors, with more added value.
The future of digital distribution will not arrive at the same time, everywhere. Direct 
distribution has achieved only a small share: only 2% and 5% respectively for P&C (Property and Casualty) in France and Italy, and even smaller percentages in Japan, where agent networks still rule. In other countries, like Canada, the Netherlands, and emerging markets like China and the Czech Republic, there are remote distribution shares of 15–25%.
The distribution model may also be changed by companies providing services 
where insurance is just one component. This may take many forms:
•	An infamous example is payment protection insurance (PPI) bundled with loans 
and mortgages in the UK. This insurance policy was said to be protecting its holders in case they were not able to repay a loan or mortgage.
•	Trov, a mobile app, provides a service that lets its users catalogue and keep track of all their belongings with their current value. This service lends itself to insurance, be it motor, home contents, or any other specialty P&C product.
•	Monsanto has acquired a big data company, The Climate Corporation, which had built an insurance product to protect farmers against weather risk, based on individual data and real‐time weather feeds. Monsanto will offer this product as part of its Integrated Farming System that provides farmers with recommendations for their farm.
While digital distribution is gaining market share quickly, it is still relatively small. Agent networks will likely adopt digital too, augmenting their own service. Distribution is not just influenced by market maturity as customer preferences and the regulatory environment will affect this. Blending insurance with other services is a great model and risk is still underwritten by insurance carriers. Is this not a threat then? In the long term, this might weaken insurers’ ties with their customers, relegating insurance policies to commodities.190
EntErPrisE innovation190Big Data
Insurance is the world’s first big data business as companies have been using data 
to model and price risk way before the term became fashionable. Insurers’ past loss and underwriting data is one of their most valuable assets.
However, the insurance industry’s lead in collecting and making sense of large 
amounts of data is fading quickly. Companies like Google, Facebook, and Amazon are collecting much more data and have arguably better tools and human capital to make sense of it. The growth of sensors (call them telematics, wearables, or Internet of Things (IoT)) around us will very soon produce vast amounts of data insurers do not have access to. A very good example is MetroMile. This company offers pay‐per‐mile auto insurance where you connect their small device to your car. The MetroMile device, besides measuring how many miles you drive, collects data on your driving habits too. No company has tracked such data before (at least for regular customers), so insurers have a much smaller data advantage. If MetroMile is able to collect data on driving behaviour and use it for actuarial purposes, it will have a strong advantage.
While it is too early to say that the insurance industry has nailed big data and is using 
it fully, it is definitely an area where traditional players still have a head‐start. Most insurers have started initiatives like AXA’s Data Innovation Lab or German Allianz’s net joint venture with Fraunhofer Labs. Using big data to customize insurance products in theory is a step in the right direction, but it will surely give rise to privacy concerns. While customers will enjoy better prices and tailor‐made products, it is still uncertain how intrusive they could find the very techniques that make it possible. Consumers and insurers will need to find a balance between discounts and the extent to which the company owns customers’ data and profile. Another risk of using IoT for insurance is cyber‐security, or rather the lack of it. These smart data collection devices are not always designed with security in mind. According to studies, 70% of the most commonly used IoT devices contain vulnerabilities that a hacker can exploit.
1 This is 
not the kind of risk insurers can or would like to price into their models.
New Entrants
Insurance is a tightly regulated market and starting a new carrier is very expensive. Oscar, a New York‐based health insurance firm had a minimal capital 
1 Eduard Kovacs, “70 Percent of IoT Devices Vulnerable to Cyberattacks: HP”, Security Week, 
29 July 2014, http://www.securityweek.com/70‐iot‐devices‐vulnerable‐cyberattacks‐hp.requirement of US$45 million. Quick growth is also difficult as regulatory capital increases with new customers. Yet, new entrants to this market could arrive from two directions.
First, from some of the companies who collect vast amounts of data in their daily 
operations (the Googles, Amazons, and Facebooks). Besides data, they have a very large customer base with whom they have much better relationships than insurers do. These companies could in theory offer insurance by leveraging their proprietary data. What is not yet clear is where in the insurance value chain these companies would want to be. The first logical place is distribution. Google is already there with Google Compare for auto insurance.
Second, start‐ups could and will enter profitable niche markets with focused, 
simple products. Just as TransferWise can do international money transfers better than the banks, there will be insurance products where new entrants perform better than current players. In the US there are start‐ups like Oscar, Gravie, and Navera that are working on providing better health insurance, a major pain‐point of customers.
Another interesting model is peer‐to‐peer insurance, and Friendsurance is an 
example of this in Germany. This model is as old as the insurance industry itself. The early models of insurance were based on the sharing of risks and rewards by a community of people (in the mutual insurance model, the community actually owns the insurance company – Benjamin Franklin introduced this model in the US in 1752). Online communities have reached a large enough scale for the mutual insurance model to work efficiently, this time not bound by geographical barriers. Coupled with low‐cost distribution, forming small communities that insure themselves may atomize previously homogeneous insurance markets.
A Note on the Digital Insurer
While looking at new market trends and how existing insurers could adapt is useful, digital transformation has more mundane opportunities for established players too. The simple digitization of existing insurance processes (straight through processing of quotes, rapid product configuration, etc.) could yield improvement to profit margins. Combined with existing companies’ scale, if done well and in a timely fashion, this too could make existing carriers rather formidable competitors in the digital age. In itself, this may not be enough, though.
EntErPrisE innovation191More 
Success Stories8Throughout the book we have heard from successful FinTech companies about their 
cutting-edge products and solutions and from FinTech thought leaders working across large organizations implementing ambitious FinTech innovation programmes. Here we share success stories from both entrepreneurs who founded FinTech firms that followed their vision and “intrapreneurs” who implement innovation in large global organizations. We look at businesses servicing consumers as well as other enterprises. What all these stories have in common is that we asked our authors to look below the surface of public relations and tell us more about the founder, their vision, and the companies’ growth over time.
You will be inspired by the founder of eToro, the world’s largest social investment network, 
discover Avoka’s story as a leading customer experience management platform, and be motivated by Bankable’s founder who is building “banking as a service” for all.
In addition, we examine how Citibank has rolled out a global FinTech challenge 
based on the vision of an intrapreneur and how SWIFT was able to spot and successfully respond to the FinTech opportunities for entrepreneurs and its global membership base of financial institutions. Both stories clearly demonstrate that even established financial institutions have the capacity to innovate and embrace change.eToro – Building the World’s 
Largest Social Investment Network
By Yoni Assia 
CEO & Founder, eToro
It is a cold Monday winter morning in the Netherlands and Noa Strijbos has gone 
out to the stables to tend to her horses. She is one of the world’s most popular horse trainers, but her 27,000 followers are not interested in her love of horses.
1 On the 
social investment network, eToro, Noa has transformed herself from an amateur observer of the financial markets to a professional trader in just three years. Her global following is waiting to see what her next investment moves are on the world’s financial markets. After all, in 2015 her investment portfolio has already risen by 25%.
I am Yoni Assia, the founder and CEO of the world’s largest social investment network. 
As a child growing up in the 80s, I was constantly surrounded by innovation. My father, David, established the technology company, Magic Software, which in 1991 became the first Israeli software company to list on NASDAQ. Surrounded by this technological revolution, I was inspired to start coding aged 14, hoping one day to play a significant role in the next stage of innovation. Like many teenagers, I began to work at weekends, collecting small amounts of change to put in my piggy bank. As a result, I wanted to put this money to good use. Feeling uninspired by seeing my hard-earned cash just sit there on the shelf and equally uninspired by the local banks, I decided that I would take control of managing my own money.
It was the 90s, tech was booming and the bulls were on the charge – both in 
the NBA and in financial markets. Men in suits, in their fast cars, working in big enclosed office buildings were trading on the world’s markets with a great deal of success. With my tech experience, as well as my aptitude for numbers, I decided to give trading a go from the comfort of my own bedroom. Why could I not join those on Wall Street and be connected myself to the world’s financial markets? Unfortunately trading was not as simple as I initially envisaged. From a practical point of view, it was all rather inconvenient and laborious. In order to get started I needed to purchase a few extra screens for my desktop computer. Once I was set up with my screens, I was able to analyse financial charts, but the whole experience seemed lonesome and helpless. In fact, my older brother, Ronen, found my fascination and struggles with finance all rather comical.
In the end, though, we both agreed that this really was no laughing matter. We 
understood quickly that global markets and economies were connected to one another, yet somehow 99% of the world was disconnected and disengaged from this ecosystem. With the emergence of technology and social connectivity globally, we realized the power was shifting to the disconnected 99%. Once equipped with the right tools and infrastructure, the masses could not only influence financial markets, but could take control of their own investment decisions. This vision and realization led to the establishment of eToro in 2006.
Building the Network
In 2006 our founders, Ronen Assia, David Ring, and myself, decided to try and solve the problems that I had encountered whilst trying to trade online. We attempted to tackle the complicated, lonesome experience of online trading and create an online trading platform that was simple and enjoyable. Why should finance be boring?
Initially our platform was designed as a financial challenge, with traders competing 
against one another in the global markets. However, we soon realized this contradicted our initial vision. Rather than competing against one another, it would be better for our users to learn from one another and we decided to revolutionize trading by allowing traders to see each other’s performance and portfolios. With the world in recession after 2008, we understood there was a demand for financial transparency and the masses had lost faith in traditional financial institutions. Against the background of increasing global debt levels, the credit crunch, and Bernie Madoff, by seeing what other traders were doing, we were adding a layer of transparency within the financial ecosystem that had never previously existed. We decided to make finance social.
Scaling the Network
In 2010 we established the world’s first social investment network, the eToro OpenBook, where members of our online community were able to follow one another. This built not only a network of traders, but a smart crowd curating 
1 http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/05/29/idUSL5N0YC2RT20150529.196
More Succe SS Storie S 196financial news and investments within personal news feeds. Traders were now 
able to consume financial news on their personalized feed, and in response trade according to this information, promoting their investment decisions to millions of people on other social networks. Financial products were now in reach of the mass market, not just the chosen few. The secrets of successful traders were no longer concealed from public view, but rather out in the open, being scrutinized or being copied, depending upon your own interpretation.
The ability to copy the traders on the eToro OpenBook not only allows members 
of our community to mimic other trading strategies, it enables investors to build people-based portfolios, creating a financial asset class of their own.
2 As well as 
bringing forth greater levels of responsibility and accountability, social trading generally outperforms independent trading, according to data analysed by MIT Media Lab. The movement of money in and out of these people-based portfolios is being done at the discretion of the investors on the network, creating a frictionless form of asset management. Almost anyone can open an account on the network, of any net worth, creating their own diversified portfolio. We have dramatically lowered the barriers to entry for anyone wishing to invest and manage their own funds, creating a network scalable in reach to millions, giving traders access to the financial markets that they had never had before. Since we launched our social investment network, we have not turned back.
The success in establishing and scaling our community was born out of a deep 
understanding of global technological trends. We examined the social revolution and, rather than believing that this was a fad, as many did, we quickly understood that this was the future of all forms of finance. By transitioning our platform to how the world was evolving, we became an early adopter and first mover in this space. This also enabled us to further embrace our vision of opening up the global markets for everyone to invest in a simple and transparent manner.
Breaking the Banks
Being copied and followed can be a lucrative business for our most popular traders. Our Popular Investor Program allows traders to receive 2% of the assets they are passively managing. This is the future of money management, a sector well known for its exclusivity, expense, smoke-screens, and mirrors. Many of the traders on the platform are now building their own profitable fund-of-funds. Today (June 2015), eToro’s network includes 4.5 million registered users in 170 countries. Hundreds of financial instruments can be traded on eToro and our investors can copy, follow, and interact with one another in virtually any language, all over the world. As of today, we have raised a total of $62 million of investment. Our most recent investment round “D” included significant funding from three major global financial institutions, PingAn from China, Sberbank from Russia, and Commerzbank from Germany – eToro being the latter’s first ever FinTech investment. The convergence of a FinTech company such as eToro and leading financial institutions demonstrates the force behind our disruption of the old world of finance.
For years, only the privileged few had access to the kind of information and the 
investment that gave them the power to move markets. The financial system is being significantly disrupted. What was once the exclusive domain of those men in suits down in Wall Street and the City is now more accessible to anyone, anytime, anywhere.
2 Decoding Social Influence and the Wisdom of the Crowd in Financial Trading Network,  by Wei 
Pan MIT, Media Lab Yaniv Altshuler MIT, and Alex (Sandy) Pentland MIT, http://web.media.mit.
edu/~panwei/pub/socialcom12.pdf.
More Succe SS Storie S 197Avoka – An Overnight Success, 
13 Years in the Making
By Derek Corcoran 
Chief Experience Officer, Avoka Technologies
“OMG!” (meaning “Oh My God!”). I was familiar with the phrase, but it was the first 
time I had ever heard an executive, never mind a C-level at a global bank, use it in a meeting. She had realized what Avoka could do for her company and I realized that we really had built something special at Avoka.
It felt like the culmination of an intense 5-month period of positive press – we had 
won back-to-back Finovate “Best Of Show” awards in London and California, we were awarded “Most Innovative Customer Engagement Solution” in the Citi Mobile Challenge, and we were called out in Inc. Magazine’s “22 Financial Technology Startups You Need to Know”. It felt like 13 years of hard work and four significant pivots (perhaps more “refinements” than “pivots”) in our business had led to Avoka becoming an “overnight” success. And the journey started . . .
In 2002, Philip Copeland and Howard Treisman, already successful businessmen and 
IT veterans, established Avoka as their next venture (Philip’s third start-up). Avoka was focused on delivering on the promise of Business Process Management (BPM), namely “Business Agility”. After completing a number of successful projects in financial services, government, and aviation, Philip and Howard realized that many of the clients they were selling to already had one, if not four, BPM or workflow systems already. They did not need another one. What they really needed was a way of connecting those systems to customers that were outside the organization. They needed to allow customers to apply online, and it needed to be a great customer experience.
PIVOT 1 – Customer Experience, 
not Business Process Management
Avoka shifted the focus from managing an organization’s internal processes to 
allowing customers to kick off a process such as applying for a loan or opening an account. The reality was that Avoka’s primary customers in financial services and government had hundreds and in some cases thousands of these types of transactions. The highest volume transactions were available online (e.g. Open a Current Account, Apply for a Credit Card) and the rest were still paper-based. The issue was that the traditional way of delivering an online experience to replace a paper or PDF form was to get the IT Department to custom-develop code using programmers. This was not cheap or fast, hence only the highest volume transactions were online. Avoka saw a need for a faster way to build these online experiences without programming – something that put the “business” in control, with IT in a support role. And that created a second need – a solution to manage these online experiences. After all, if you have got hundreds of online transactions, then you will need somewhere to maintain them. This led to the development of the first iteration of Avoka’s product, Transact.
We learned a lot during this period about consumer behaviour and what makes a 
good customer experience. We took these learnings and we baked them in to our product, so each subsequent client benefited from the lessons of those that went before them. As a result, Avoka was now a customer experience company.
PIVOT 2 – Mobile, the Game-changer
On 9 January 2007 at the Moscone Center in San Francisco, Steve Jobs introduced the world to the iPhone. It changed everything – from how we check the weather to how we communicate, from how we find information to how we shop. Initially our clients told us “people do not want to apply for a loan or open a bank account on an iPhone, the screen is too small”, but we were not so sure.
In the following years, it became apparent that customers wanted to do everything 
on their mobile phone, including applying for a bank account, a loan, or lodging an insurance claim. One insurance company explained to us how they wanted to make it easy for customers displaced by a storm to be able to lodge an insurance claim on their smartphone, tablet or PC … whatever they had access to after a natural disaster. It needed to be convenient, not an app the customer had to download.
Building the capability to support mobile and desktop devices from a single design 
was probably the most significant single product development we invested in. But later we would realize that it was absolutely the right thing to do. Avoka was now a customer experience company focused on the new frontier of the “digital channel” encompassing PCs, smartphones, and the new wave of tablets.198
More Succe SS Storie S 198PIVOT 3 – Cloud Computing 
Comes of Age
At the same time that Steve Jobs and mobile were changing the customer experience, 
Jeff Bezos and the Cloud were changing how organizations built and hosted their software applications. And this provided an enormous opportunity for Avoka.
At this point, Avoka’s product was one that was installed in an organization’s 
data centre and our typical clients were banks, insurers, wealth managers, and government agencies. Getting a new server in to the data centre of an organization like this was hard, really hard. The data centres were typically managed by large IT outsourcing companies who provided additional services such as installation, security, back-up, redundancy etc. on top of the bare-metal server. A $10,000 server could easily cost $100,000 per year in total costs and 2–6-month lead times to order, receive, and install a server were not unusual.
For a business like Avoka that was already experiencing 3–12-month sales cycles, 
adding additional months before customers went live was crippling. “Agility is the new black” and traditional data centres were far from agile. Using the Cloud, we could set up a brand new instance of our product for a customer in a single day. Hallelujah!
At this point, we also made a decision to move to transaction-based pricing. If 
a customer completed an application, for example, for a new bank account, a charge was incurred. This allowed Avoka to better align the cost of our product to the value it was delivering. There was some resistance to this new approach at the time – organizations were used to thinking in terms of “buying” software and paying for maintenance and support. But as products like Salesforce continued to grow in popularity, so did the idea of Software as a Service (SaaS). We stood our ground on the new SaaS model and in about 18 months the objections pretty much disappeared. Avoka was now a SaaS company focused on digital customer experience.
PIVOT 4 – Focus. Focus. Focus.
At this time, Avoka was growing nicely and had customers in banking, insurance, wealth management, government, pharmaceuticals, engineering, construction, transportation … and so on. We felt the time was right to look for a way to drive explosive growth. Everything we knew and read said that we needed to “focus”.It was obvious that we should focus on financial services and particularly banking and wealth management – but what exactly should our value proposition be? Why should a bank engage Avoka as a new vendor? We helped with operational efficiency, IT productivity, time to market, customer acquisition, but it was still too broad. What would Avoka’s unique value proposition be for our target clients? What would our elevator pitch be? That was probably the hardest question we ever had to answer. The thing was, we already knew the answer – we just hadn’t joined the dots yet.
Eight years earlier, an executive at a large bank had told us that “abandonment rates 
for online personal loan applications are running at around 92%”. “Imagine,” he exclaimed, “if 92% of customers that walked in to a branch left before completing a transaction or if 92% of calls to our call center went unanswered – we would be out of business pretty quickly.” Abandonment of online sales transactions (account opening, loan applications etc.) in financial services is a huge problem and it seemed banking was the only industry willing to accept such poor conversion rates. And as the digital channel was growing in importance, the problem was getting worse. In an environment with low interest rates (post-financial crisis) and new offerings like peer-to-peer lending, traditional financial institutions had become very focused on acquiring new customers. They were investing heavily in digital marketing to ensure that if a customer was in the market for a product, their bank “got found”. The problem was, when the customer hit “Apply Now” the experience was pretty similar to how it was in the early 2000s, and so abandonment rates remained high.
Then we got lucky. We were introduced to a financial institution that was absolutely 
focused on writing more personal loans and was willing to work with us to achieve that. We delivered a new personal loan application in just 10 days and then our team jointly started watching the abandonment statistics we were generating. We asked ourselves “where are customers abandoning and why?” We would form a hypothesis (“maybe if we changed X”), talk to the customer about it, and their reaction was “get on with it … make the change!” So we did and immediately monitored the abandonment. Lo and behold, it reduced, meaning more completed loan applications. So we made more and more changes – always just changing one thing at a time so we knew if it was positive or negative.
It worked! In just six weeks, we had worked together to reduce their loan 
application abandonment rate from 64% to 49% – a significant increase in loans written every week. This experience helped increase our knowledge of the problem, but also gave us proof that abandonment could be effectively combatted, or at 
More Succe SS Storie S 199least reduced. By looking at the friction or effort associated with completing an 
online loan or account application and identifying ways to minimize that friction (i.e. make it easy for the consumer), everybody wins. I cannot overstate the importance of having a customer and real data to prove our value proposition is real, not theoretical. Prospects connect with stories, not PowerPoint slides.
We took the concept of frictionless digital sales to Finovate, the leading conference for 
cutting-edge banking and financial technology (with a unique demo-only format) and won three back-to-back “Best of Show” awards. This provided confirmation that what we were talking about and delivering was valued by the finance sector. Avoka was now a SaaS company focused on frictionless customer experiences in financial services.
We had found our home.
Lessons Learned
In FinTech, there are two types of company:
Disruptors – those that offer an alternative to traditional banking such as peer-to-
peer lending.
Collaborators – those that offer banks an alternative way to do business.Avoka is a collaborator.Now, to say we pivoted four times is not entirely accurate. It was more a refinement 
of our solution and business model. But they were significant changes. And along the way, we have learned some valuable lessons.
Sell something that makes your clients successful – if your product/service can be 
directly connected to helping make your clients successful, in particular acquiring new customers (as opposed to reducing operating costs etc.), focus on that. And when working with clients, listen and learn, and embed those learnings into your offering.
Tell your “story” with results – as soon as you can, build a case study (even a blind/
anonymous one) with hard cold data showing the value you have delivered. And deliver this as a story, like you would tell at a BBQ. People connect with stories.
Adapt to change – if you are in FinTech, the only constant is change. You cannot 
respond to every suggested “game-changing technology”, but you should keep your finger on the pulse of the industry and be prepared to move. If a technology looks like it has the potential to help consumers and make their lives easier, there is a good chance they will adopt it (iPhone, peer-to-peer lending, etc.) so give these technologies your special attention to establish how they could help or hinder your business.200
More Succe SS Storie S 200Bankable – Banking as  
a Service
By Eric Mouilleron 
Founder & CEO, Bankable
I founded Bankable in 2007 when the word “FinTech” had not even been coined.
It all started at a dinner party in London in November 2006 where I met a lady who 
had invested in the prepaid payments space in the United States. Prepaid was already a high-growth industry in the US and I thought this growth would spread to Europe. I had a closer look at the payments industry and discovered an opaque world with abusive fees, huge inefficiencies, and lack of real-time processing. I realized this industry was ripe for disruption by adding a real-time component, flexibility, efficiency, and transparency to the new payment equation. I wanted to launch a new software venture from scratch, which would be innovative and disruptive, yet not capital- or resource-intensive. Payments were exactly the right space.
I come from a technology background. At Valtech, an IT project-based consultancy 
that I previously co-founded in 1993, our growth was by definition limited by our headcount. The more billable team members we had to deliver software projects, the more our capacity to invoice grew. I wanted to break that fatality and build a scalable business not strictly dependent upon recruiting new staff. In six years, Valtech grew from two founders in one office to 1,200 employees with 12 offices in eight countries. The company was financed with money from friends and family, which quickly translated into revenues from clients. In April 1999, Valtech went public on the Paris stock exchange and at its peak in 2000, reached a market capitalization of US$1.5 billion.
Recognizing the gaps in the payments industry, I was determined to displace 
payment inefficiencies with efficient, real-time, affordable, and secure solutions. Realizing the scalability achievable in a business that is driven by technology, I envisioned powering payments with globally scalable technological innovation. I attended the first MasterCard Prepaid Conference in Prague in May 2007. The energy brought about by such a large concentration of people at the conference confirmed my belief that prepaid payments was a booming sector with tremendous growth potential. I wanted to be part of it.I restarted discussions with the company I had visited in the US with the aim of importing their prepaid payments technology to Europe. However, this proved impossible as their software issuing platform lacked the flexibility to become global. Based on my previous experience of delivering scalable software solutions to clients, I then decided to develop an in-house flexible transactional platform which would suit the needs of large financial and non-financial institutions targeting the payment pain-points of both corporates and consumers.
However, regulation prevented non-bank financial institutions from launching a 
payments service in Europe straight away. With the industry moving swiftly in the US, where a growing number of start-ups were redefining financial services, I waited in anticipation of a wave of change that would hit Europe as well. Meanwhile, I continued working on the business and legal architecture for Bankable. Two years later, I was finally rewarded for my patience. In November 2009, the Payment Services Directive was implemented by most EU Member States in order to stimulate competition in the marketplace to provide consumers with transparent and efficient financial services. This was the necessary regulatory change that would allow us to operate in Europe as a new payment technology enabler. Also, in December 2009, this change of regulation helped me close a first round of funding of EUR1.5 million from a single private investor. Bankable started operations in January 2010 as a payment programme manager headquartered in London.
I chose London, as the Financial Conduct Authority (UK) has always encouraged 
competition in the finance industry and the UK government in general actively promoted business. A majority of e-money institutions are headquartered in the UK. London’s position as a global trading hub with a large concentration of financial technology businesses and headquarters of large corporates and financial institutions is unmatched in Europe. Thus, London also attracts a highly skilled and diverse talent pool.
As a co-founder of Valtech for 12 years, I had always encouraged a multicultural 
and diverse environment. I applied the same values to Bankable and employed people who brought specialized skillsets and were experts in their respective fields – from consultancy and law, to defence and the telecommunications industry. I wanted to build a team of brilliant people who brought in fresh ideas and did not hesitate to speak their mind. My experience has taught me that putting such people in a room together generates ingenious ideas and solutions. I met my first employee through the former Head of Prepaid at MasterCard Europe. He brought in extensive 
More Succe SS Storie S 201Over five years, Bankable has evolved and broadened its scope to offer innovative 
payment solutions by shifting focus from prepaid cards as a means of payment to the company’s vision of providing “Banking as a Service”. To meet the business needs of large financial institutions and disruptive FinTech players alike, we have evolved our platform into a highly flexible transactional platform which works as a core to provide bespoke payment solutions. Our platform enables any regulated or non-regulated organization to launch targeted payment solutions quickly.
For instance, a French serial entrepreneur, who also happens to be my neighbour, 
identified an opportunity to launch a financial tool targeted towards the younger generation. I introduced him to Bankable’s platform while having coffee with him one morning when he realized that the platform’s bespoke functionality could power his idea. Bankable then provided a set of APIs
2 allowing him to quickly build Anyti.
me, a solution which replaces cash as a child’s pocket money with a prepaid card, while providing parents with monitoring tools. The solution has been very well received in France and resonates with the idea of providing essential payments services and transaction monitoring in real-time.
Today, Bankable’s team is based in offices in London and Paris, represents five 
nationalities, and speaks eight languages. As FinTech spreads globally, Bankable wants to play a part in the ongoing revolution by continuously providing efficient and cost-effective payment solutions for everyone. We are looking to expand our services to emerging markets where the robust and innovative Bankable platform will help to displace cash. My priority now is to make Bankable a success and for it to become the “Intel Inside” of payments.experience in the prepaid industry, which was vital in laying the foundations of Bankable. I was then introduced to my partner and Bankable’s current Chief Operating Officer through a friend at a party in May 2010. Given his consultancy background, I shared my business proposal with him to get feedback. He saw opportunity in the business and eventually decided to join Bankable in September 2010. I gradually built the rest of my team mostly through connections made during the two years that I waited for regulation to change.
With a team in place, I reached out to some Deutsche Bank representatives who 
I had also met at a conference for non-bank financial institutions. They were keen on learning more about challenger banks and FinTech and were willing to provide their feedback during every step of the development of the transactional platform I had in mind. We worked on building the first version of the Bankable platform and simultaneously scheduled meetings and put contracts in place with payment processors, the card bureau, and banks for BIN
1 sponsorship. With these 
partnerships in place, the first successful transaction on the Bankable platform was processed in March 2011.
Subsequently, Bankable’s platform underwent an 18-month audit by Deutsche Bank 
Global Transaction Banking, making us the sole “Global Approved Vendor” by Deutsche Bank in our space. We then created a corporate disbursement prepaid card programme for Deutsche Bank which went live in October 2013. Having such a brand attached to Bankable was very beneficial as it created instant trust and built credibility with potential clients and partners. Today, Bankable has over 80 clients across Europe.
1 A Bank Identification Number (BIN) is the first 6 digits on a payment card and identifies the 
bank that issues/sponsors it.2 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.202
More Succe SS Storie S 202The Next Chapter in Citi’s 
Story of Innovation
By Jorge Ruiz 
Global Head, Digital Acceleration, Citi
Looking at the financial industry today, competition is fierce and companies have a 
clear opportunity to innovate – to step up to the demands and expectations of their clients, create new products and experiences, and fuel progress in the industry. At the same time, there is a huge population of developers and designers around the globe who are poised to help make those changes but they need to be invited to join the conversation. As a result, we see these innovative individuals creating financial start-ups instead of joining major corporations. We read about these start-up companies all the time; either they are taking market share from established banks or being acquired by them. They are often viewed as competition but it is not that simple. At Citi, we are disrupting the norm by encouraging and empowering individuals to work with us to help innovate and change the financial industry.
The Onset of FinTech
Financial Technology (FinTech) is transforming the way individuals and institutions engage with money. Almost every major bank is doing something in the FinTech space – from hiring consultants to creating competitions, hackathons, accelerators, venture funds, and developer programmes. It has only been within the past few years that these major players have begun paying attention to the start-ups and small businesses that are making amazing contributions to the banking ecosystem. It used to be that an industry dominated by global players with banking licences would pose a barrier to entry for young brands and innovators. But now, long-standing brands should be looking to these smaller players to shake up the status quo and collaborate to enact change within the once stagnant financial industry.
Banks have the opportunity to rethink how they approach innovation and to 
transform themselves using some of the creative applications being conceived and brought to market by non-traditional financial players. At Citi, we are looking at developed ecosystems as well as other unexpected places around the globe, to find the next big thing in banking. Building relationships and spending significant time in markets that were once considered far-flung is critical for us to really understand the location-specific challenges that our clients face. The ideas and solutions we are unearthing as we explore could help us keep a step ahead of a disruptive market.
The pace of FinTech innovation today is a challenge for traditional banks. Large 
banks have ingrained planning processes and face regulations that can result in a long go-to-market cycle and complicated approval processes. They are not regarded as nimble or particularly responsive. Start-ups, while lacking the resources of global corporations, are boundless when it comes to leveraging new technology and have thus been able to work nimbly to innovate and respond to customer feedback at a fraction of the cost.
One specific area in which Citi is fast-tracking FinTech innovation and development 
is through the Digital Acceleration team. This global team was created to fuel progress by working with FinTech organizations and leveraging outside-in innovation to unleash the power of the tech community, develop new solutions, and disrupt the way banks innovate.
The Path to Acceleration
In looking at the financial industry as a whole, there are clearly two paths major institutions can take. The first is a defensive position – the idea that there is little that the start-up community can contribute and that they do not need to be viewed as serious competition. Countless companies across numerous industries have taken this path and have not only lost relevance but also market share to the very start-ups they should be collaborating with. The second path, and the one that we at Citi have chosen, is finding avenues to work with as many innovative companies as possible in helping them design and innovate our sector, which ultimately benefits us and our millions of customers. While we have incredibly talented developers working internally on everything from our dot-com presence to first-of-its-kind mobile technology, there’s a limit to what we can accomplish on our own. We know that global markets each have their own specific needs and desires shaped by infrastructure, culture, mobile adoption, Wi-Fi access, and countless other factors. We realized we needed to create a platform to give talent a voice while also helping drive the type of innovations needed locally by our customers.
Once we decided we wanted to collaborate with developers, we needed to find a 
way for them to get their foot in the door. It is not always easy to get a meeting or 
More Succe SS Storie S 203sign a deal with an executive at a global financial institution. How could we make 
that a possibility? After looking at all the players we wanted to include – developers, designers, technology thought leaders, and governments – we created the Citi Mobile Challenge (CMC). The programme is a next-generation accelerator that does not limit itself to a physical location but conducts a three-month programme virtually around the world, leveraging Citi’s unparalleled global reach to discover and incubate solutions across more than 100 markets.
Creating the Citi Mobile Challenge
Citi’s approach to banking innovation is more than a competition. It is an opportunity for us to transform the financial industry by working with top developers and designers who can take us to the next level and truly change the way the world banks. CMC is connecting developers and resources in a way that is not happening frequently or quickly enough elsewhere in financial services.
The CMC takes place wherever the developers are – the choice of when and how to 
work is entirely in their hands. Developers from around the globe are given access to APIs
1 from Citi and from leading technology companies to build solutions that 
can change the world. Finalists are selected and prepare for Demo Days, where they have the opportunity to present their prototype solution in person. Leaders from Citi and dozens of other companies judge these events and meet directly with the developers. Top innovations are selected and incubated by Citi to help turn their prototypes into viable pilots.
Citi Mobile Challenge Launches  
in Latin America
Citi Mobile Challenge launched its inaugural programme in Latin America in 
spring 2014. One hundred and fifty ideas were submitted by over 500 developers from 19 different countries. The speed and early results of the programme were remarkable – and we knew that we were on to something that would truly transform digital banking. Eleven top innovations were announced and project managers were assigned to each team to help these developers navigate Citi’s businesses and processes. Citi has launched pilots with two of those teams. The first is PAQ, a full-cycle mobile commerce platform that connects a microfinance institution, a tech provider, a small retailer, a corporate distributor, and Citi to promote financial inclusion. The second is PideloRapido, an integrated personalized e-commerce solution. These pilots are excellent examples of how we can connect with external developers and even other financial institutions and enable progress for more of our clients all over the world. For those of us at Citi, it’s also a wonderful illustration of how we can connect across business lines and geographies to fuel progress for a variety of our clients.
Citi Mobile Challenge Travels the World
After a successful initial programme in Latin America, Citi Mobile Challenge travelled to the United States in autumn 2014 and to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa in spring 2015. With each Challenge, the programme added new elements, deepened relationships with sponsors, and grew its community of FinTech thought leaders.
In the United States, our call for submissions attracted more than 700 registrations 
from 62 countries. We reviewed 61 working prototypes from finalists at Demo Days in Silicon Valley, New York, and Miami, and named 12 top innovations in mobile solutions and the Internet of Things. We grew from three sponsors in Latin America to 18 in the US and added value to developers through increased mentorship. The conversation around the competition expanded beyond the walls of the Demo Days through press coverage and social media engagement. We decided this was the right moment for Citi to launch another way of engaging with the developer community, through Citi FinTech Meetups.
In December 2014, we announced the inaugural Citi FinTech Meetup in Miami, 
which focused on the city’s significance as a financial technology hub connecting the Americas. The programme’s goal is to further empower and engage thriving local developer ecosystems, deepen connections with the best thinkers, and stimulate digital progress in the industry. We continue to hold regular Meetups in Miami and are looking forward to expanding to new markets.
The next stage of the Citi Mobile Challenge world tour was Europe, the Middle 
East, and Africa (EMEA) in the spring of 2015. We expanded the scope of the programme to include more countries than ever before and added new elements to benefit developers. Major sponsorships were formed with companies including IBM, MasterCard, and Uber, which resulted in more APIs for developers to use and a series of webinars to help participants enhance their solutions before the Demo Day events in Nairobi, Jerusalem, Warsaw, and London. Local government officials joined us as guest speakers and our judges included executives from collaborating firms and 
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.204
More Succe SS Storie S 204even some alumni from past Challenges. Developers in EMEA completely reimagined 
what FinTech is and how far it could go, helping to make banking even more personal and connected. Our experience in the region has broadened our thinking on what this programme can achieve and the huge potential of outside-in innovation.
What’s Next?
As we turn our attention to other regions of the world, the Citi Mobile Challenge team is excited to continue our journey, build our community, and discover new applications for FinTech. The top innovations and resulting pilots from Citi Mobile Challenge are only the tip of the iceberg. We have been very lucky to work with thought leaders throughout the FinTech community and deepen relationships with many of our clients, collaborating companies, and colleagues. Meeting and working with these developers has been truly inspiring and the response from our colleagues at Citi is energizing. As we look at our product portfolio today, it is clear Citi Mobile Challenge has accelerated outside-in innovation. We are committed to growing the programme, as well as adding new elements to make the experience even more valuable for developers, Citi, and the entire banking industry. As we see it, the programme is Citi’s next step in FinTech innovation and will connect players at all levels of the financial ecosystem as they strive to reimagine digital banking and improve the financial experience.
More Succe SS Storie S 205FinTech Trends from 
the Frontline – Building Collaborative Opportunities for Start-ups, Market Infrastructures, and Wholesale Banks
By Fabian Vandenreydt 
Global Head of Securities Markets, Innotribe & The SWIFT  Institute at SWIFT
As an integral part of SWIFT, Innotribe has a unique position within FinTech 
innovation – identifying key trends and opportunities, leveraging talent, and ensuring that the financial services ecosystem benefits from fresh thinking from start-ups. Innotribe was one of the initial facilitators that helped to accelerate and spread the first wave of FinTech innovation, and it continues to play an important role in this process. Leveraging SWIFT’s expansive global network, Innotribe collaborates with investors, venture capitalists, strategists, banks, and financial institutions. Innotribe also supports the growth of FinTech innovation globally with its Start-up Challenge programme, strategic partnerships, thought leadership, and its forum at Sibos, the world’s premier financial services event for the financial industry.
The FinTech landscape has changed substantially since Innotribe was launched 
back in 2009, and the number of major players has rapidly increased. Five years ago “FinTech” was far from a household term. The pace of change is swift and has a profound impact on how the financial services industry operates. We see this first-hand in the exponential growth of our Start-up Challenge, for which applications have more than doubled in just two years – from 175 companies in 2013 to 370 in 2015. In addition to the overall expansion of FinTech, the topics that these players focus on are becoming more mature, and reach deeper into the core of wholesale banking and market infrastructures. There is clearly a developing understanding about what needs to evolve in banking systems, both retail and wholesale. Moreover, the professionalism of start-ups is increasing, thanks to improved coaching and mentoring programmes. Start-ups are becoming much savvier in terms of how procurement processes work in banks and they better understand how to come up with the facts and figures required to successfully present an idea.These hungry young companies are changing the competitive landscape. They are adopting new technologies and business models to meet the needs of financial institutions in everything from lending to securities and payments. In parallel, the industry as a whole is becoming ever more curious to understand and potentially capitalize on new ideas. This is evident in the number of entities, such as incubators and accelerators, who exist to help nurture start-up talent and bridge the gap between the financial community and the start-up ecosystem. We have also seen a major change in the relationship between start-ups/early growth companies and banks. It used to be an “us against them” dynamic, but the sentiments have evolved significantly. The banks now see FinTech as an integral part of their innovation strategy, and there is a need to recognize it as such. There is an emerging sense of collaboration between banks and new FinTech companies.
Geographical trends are also interesting. FinTech innovation tends to emerge 
in specific cities, or financial centres, rather than at the level of countries as a whole. Nevertheless, the overall number of hubs is rising and we predict that the expansion of FinTech will continue. Long-established financial centres are broadening their horizons and increasingly embracing FinTech. Frankfurt, Luxembourg, Dublin, and London are just a few examples of a growing network of FinTech havens popping up all over Europe. Part of their recipe for success is being very open to all professions and nationalities. A combination of financial backing, real estate backing, and academia is equally important. This valuable mix makes such environments attractive destinations for start-ups. In addition to the larger financial centres, the Nordic region has – from a technology and an enterprise standpoint – typically been at the forefront of things, and is now increasing its presence in FinTech as well. Spanish banks have also been active in prioritizing subsets and pockets of FinTech innovation. Beyond Europe, from the Asia Pacific to Latin America, we are witnessing the development of new start-up hubs in markets which are fertile for innovation and disruption. For SWIFT and Innotribe, Africa is a region of emerging importance across the business, but also in terms of innovation. It was for this reason that we brought the Start-up Challenge to Cape Town this year for the first time, which was a great way of drawing attention to innovation happening on the ground in African communities and outside the “traditional” Start-up Challenge geographies of London, New York, and Singapore.
Ultimately, if you are in a financial centre, you will attract investors as, more often than 
not, it is a safe place to invest. But it helps if there is also a unique selling point – such as talent. Most aspiring FinTech communities realize that they need to import talent 206
More Succe SS Storie S 206to some extent, but some ecosystems are more advanced than others. You want to 
start small, but the sooner you open up, the better. Singapore is a prominent example. The start-up scene has opened up to importing talent with very specific skills, such as cyber skills or venture funds skills, in order to boost their ecosystem and to scale it faster. We have also noticed a growing demand from governments or banking associations to create a positive environment for FinTech innovation. In the US, for example, there has been the conscious development of a culture of controlled risk-taking and an environment has been created that allows people to fail gracefully. This mind-set shift ensures that start-ups are not considered “unsuccessful” if they fail the first time round, and it becomes much easier to pick up and start again.
It may sound simplistic to highlight the importance of such a positive, “can do” 
environment, but it remains integral to the success of innovation in Silicon Valley and it is an ethos that is also reflected in New York. Moreover, if an entrepreneur asks a potential investor for $100k in the US, the response is likely to be: “What can you do with $1 million?” Whereas in Europe, if a start-up asks for $100k, the investors might ask: “What can you do with $50k?” It is a very different approach to risk and ambition.
Another important theme is fostering diversity of talent. This year, we have 
tracked the gender of the founders of firms applying to participate in our Start-up Challenge. At 23% female and 77% male, the figure is unbalanced and we hope to stimulate improvement. Considering that there was only one female CEO among the current list of top 50 European FinTech companies (by venture funding), our numbers are not bad – but clearly it is not 50/50. This is an issue that has been raised a lot in debate among industry players recently, and we hope to address it further from an educational perspective.
Looking to the future, we now have an alumni network of more than 650 start-ups. 
We are very proud of this, and we hope to empower this vibrant ecosystem to work together on specific areas of innovation that truly add value for the wider financial community. And as a company, SWIFT plans to work closely with start-ups and growth-stage companies to develop proofs of concept which will empower our strategy going forward.
We feel that it is essential for companies to identify opportunities to collaborate, 
share experiences and learning, and debate common challenges. If we want to move forward as an industry, collaboration across the various FinTech communities is more important than ever. As a global cooperative, SWIFT is eager to support innovation and to find ways of bringing scalable, real-world change to address the many change drivers prevalent in the financial community. As technological innovation continues to evolve, Innotribe will play a vital role in continuing to bring the start-up ecosystem and financial services expertise together.
More Succe SS Storie S 207Crypto-
currencies  and  Blockchains9This part focuses on digital currency and the various 
applications of the blockchain.1 Until now, the most 
important manifestation of blockchain technologies has been Bitcoin. What comes next? What are alternative applications of the underlying blockchain technology to financial services?
Most Bitcoin 2.0 applications are still at the emerging 
stage, but they promise to improve the architecture of transaction-based industries. The authors in this part envision several categories of blockchain technologies that will impact the financial industry: digital currencies, asset registries, application stacks, and asset-centric technologies.
1 A blockchain is a permissionless distributed database based on the bitcoin protocol that maintains a continuously growing list of data records hardened against tampering and revision, even by 
operators of the data store’s nodes. The initial and most widely known application of blockchain technology is the public ledger of transactions for bitcoin.FinTech + Digital Currency   –  
Convergence or Collision?
By Manie Eagar
President/CEO, DigitalFutures; Director, Bitcoin Alliance  of Canada
Crypto-currency Meets Digital 
Finance and Mobile Value Exchange
In just two short years crypto-currency has grown from a hobby project to a multi-billion 
dollar global digital finance industry. With new competing alternatives and technologies advancing beyond simple currency-based payments, to all manner of value exchange, financial instruments, smart contracts, and blockchain-based distributed ledgers, everyone is waking up to the fact that bitcoin was just the beginning.
Arriving just in time for the great convergence of mobile payments, digital 
branchless banking, and digital-value exchange, bitcoin, alternative currencies, and digital finance innovations promise a major disruption of global finance.
Originally an outlier technology, the business of bitcoin, and its broader digital 
money applications, has now grabbed the attention of all major financial institutions, consumer technologies, and regulators all over the world. We will explore the tension between decentralization versus the “new channels to market” play of the various incumbents.
The bitcoin proposition: In his seminal paper “A peer-to-peer electronic cash 
system” dated November 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto envisaged that “A purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash would allow online payments to be sent directly from one party to another without going through a financial institution.”
From this simple premise the bitcoin phenomenon has grown in scope (2 million 
plus current users projected to grow to 5m according to Juniper research
1) and size ($3.7bn market capitalization as of early July 2015) to grab the attention of media headlines worldwide thanks to the infamous MtGox and Silk Road debacles. Bankers and regulators still quote these two factors as the specific reasons that they don’t “trust” bitcoin, confusing business malpractice with the legitimate applications of a highly disruptive financial innovation.
But what is unstoppable is the convergence of two major FinTech sectors with that 
of bitcoin and newer digital currency and blockchain-based technologies – the crossroads where Digital Banking and Mobile Transactions meet the Crypto-currency Protocol(s). Will this be a natural convergence or a collision? What are the implications, opportunities, and challenges for FinTech start-ups, entrepreneurs, investors, and established legacy players alike?
The Internet of Money: A Radical 
New Business Model
The key drivers for the emerging FinTech and digital currency innovation are to 
provide services that are secure, frictionless and almost free, in real time, anywhere. The efficiencies that these technologies alone offer are incentive enough for every traditional financial services provider to sit up and take notice, whilst entrepreneurs in the crypto-currency space have attracted more than $1.5bn in investments, with the broader FinTech sector projecting $22bn in 2015.
2
What will drive the adoption of the overlapping technologies and the efficiencies and disruptive business opportunities? The 2015 World Economic Forum report on “The Future of Financial Services”
3 highlights that incumbent players are most likely to be 
attacked where the greatest sources of customer friction meet the largest profit pools.
Customers, consumers, and users are becoming the new co-creators of value. 
This requires a value transfer system that rewards each respective contribution incrementally and directly, regardless of the kind of services or goods being offered anywhere in the world in real time.
2 http://www.fintechinnovationlablondon.co.uk/media/730274/Accenture-The-Future-of-Fintech-
and-Banking-digitallydisrupted-or-reima-.pdf.
3 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_future__of_financial_services.pdf.1 http://www.juniperresearch.com/researchstore/commerce-money/cryptocurrency/
bitcoin-altcoin-impact-opportunities.212
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains212Digital Asset Management and 
Value Exchange
Digital asset management and value exchange are fast becoming the virtual market 
spaces where globally distributed organizations and communities connect to barter, exchange, transact, settle, and interact around different modes of digital value exchange. Key sectors of the digital economy will participate in closed or open digital economy market spaces facilitated by secure distributed ledger applications.
As the digital economy becomes global and pervasive, key focus areas will be 
digital asset management and value exchange; distribution and logistics; Internet of Things (IOT); Machine-to-Machine data (M2M); distributed, online and mobile payments; and global remittances and settlements via smart contracts.•	Government-to-business and business-to-government (G2B2G) information tracking, auditing, taxation, foreign exchange, remittances, and foreign trade monitoring have historically been challenging. Banks have notably been coming under scrutiny and have received heavy fines for not complying or for not properly monitoring the activities of foreign agents, customers, and branch offices.
•	Government-to-citizen (G2C2G) services cover every aspect of services to citizens such as registration, taxation, issuing of passports, voting, and the engagement of citizens with government agencies at every level. Vast disparate systems cannot cope with the demand and the multiplicity of duplicate public records, creating silos and multiple points of failure open to hacking, personal identity risk, and fraud.
•	Business-to-business (B2B) covers aspects of inter-business trade and settlements, manufacturing and distribution, logistics, supply chain management, to digital rights and online services.
•	Interactive business-to-consumer (B2C2B) in physical and online retail and services, linked to social media will increasingly become a driver for national 
Production of value:
Co-creation of value:Storage of value:
Registration, storage,
promotion & distribution of
value:Producers /
Creator(s)
The production and
lnterexchange of  digital goods
and services; e.g. content
creation (music, artwork, books,
design); smart contracts; share
certificates; legal; accounting;
machine-to-machine trading;
peer-to-peer lending,
crowdfundlng; gifting; resource,
knowledge and skills sharing;
etc.Cross-jurisdictional, global
digital market spaces for digital
storage of value; e.g.
distributors; exchanges; market
makers, smart contracts;
tokenization; digital currencies;
loyalty schemes; promotions 
etc.
Products, services, rights,
patents and licenses lodged
on cross-linked publlc/private
blockchains.Identity, actions, assets,
transactions and usage
recorded and stored in
distributed ledgers
(blockchains).Exchange of value:
Access to, and processing
of value exchange:
Users, consumers, aggregators,
market spaces, resellers,
licensees, merchants, agents
and promoters of digital goods
and services.
Validation and verification of
identity and transactions.
Compliance (KYC, fraud
prevention, AML).
The ‘Internet of things’ meets
the ‘Internet of value
exchange’ .
The tokenization of value
distribution.Digital market
spacesUsers /
Consumer(s)
Figure:   Digital asset management and value exchange
Key sectors that the distributed ledger (blockchain) and related tokenization (read digital currencies) plus smart contracts applications will address are:
•	Government-to-government (G2G) verification and validation of assets and data 
related to finance, development aid, asset registers, taxation, duties to discover money laundering and to monitor sanctions and trade agreements.AccessCreationDecentralized
trust
Sharing
Knowledge, skills
& resourcesCollaboration
Co-creation
& productionDistribution
& Exchange
of Value
+
IOTStorage
Figure:   Value creation and exchange in the digital economy + the 
Internet of Things
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains213and global economies. Business will in turn leverage consumer databases and 
performance tracking to streamline their services and deliver value at scale.
•	Citizen-to-citizen (C2C) economic engagement will increasingly manifest in the shared and digital economy with crowdfunding, peer-to-peer lending, informal trade, barter, and exchange as drivers.
Hybrid Digital Finance Platform 
Convergence
Digital finance will be distinguished from the old ways of banking and traditional 
financial legacy systems through the convergence of digital banking, mobile value exchange, and crypto-currency applications in a variety of forms suited to different jurisdictions, market evolutions, and the differentiated needs of the banked versus the so-called underbanked (estimated at 2bn) worldwide.
4
There is increasingly talk of the “Internet of Money”, converging with the “Internet of Value” (exchange) and the “Internet of Things” and greater understanding of the opportunity in digital finance services and distributed infrastructure development.
The digital finance landscape is evolving to address these opportunities, creating 
huge system-wide convergence and integration, and niche players alike. At the end of the day, the users/consumers of all these offerings will decide which variations suit them best based on ease of use, access, stability, store of value, security, reduced friction, exchangeability, transferability etc. – ultimately the best user experience (UX) for the money.
Delivery platforms from every sector of the industry will vie for a stake in this 
lucrative and necessary business – from the so-called over- to underbanked parts of the world. There is no question that the world financial system needs an overhaul, or at the very least sound and viable alternatives to the current legacy system-driven offerings and the latest innovations emerging through branchless banking and mobile transactions/payments. There is a great chance that bitcoin itself could become dis-intermediated, as crypto-currency technologies, business processes, and alternative currencies and protocols emerge or become adopted by existing and new players in the FinTech, digital currency, and mobile payment sectors.What this implies is a “hybridization” of digital finance technologies and a combination of decentralized and centralized platforms and delivery channels. There are a number of reasons why this dual economy is likely to emerge, including the ease with which digital currencies can unite global consumers and merchants: the low cost of digital currency payments, the openness of consumers to new innovations, and the growing influence of technology companies according to Gareth Murphy, director of markets for the Central Bank of Ireland speaking at the BitFin 2014, Digital Money and the Future of Finance Conference in Dublin.
5
He envisions a hybrid Bitcoin-Fiat future where “The existence of a ‘euro-denominated economy’ and a ‘virtual currency economy’ raises the prospect of an internal balance of payments between two sub-economies where suppliers may prefer one currency over another as a means of payment (for different goods and services).”
He continues: “Multi-currency economies are not unusual. For example, the US 
dollar is accepted in many economies alongside the local legal tender. Also, there are a number of regional currencies in existence in many parts of the world that aim to encourage transactions in local goods and services.”
convergenceMobile payments
- Branchless banking
- Micropayments
Internet of value
exchange
- Mobile commerce
- TokenizationCryptocurrency
protocols
- Digital tokens
- Blockchains
Figure:   Convergence of FinTech
4 http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/04/15/massive-drop-in-number-of-
unbanked-says-new-report.5 https://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/speeches/Pages/GarethMurphyBitFin2014.aspx.214
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains214One area of convergence highlighted by long-running venture capital firm Kleiner 
Perkins Caufield & Byers (KPCB), after announcing their blockchain investment fund,
6 is the rapid developer adoption of the technology with fundamentally 
new capabilities and agile applications enabled by blockchain. Permissioned or permission-less (e.g. bitcoin) blockchain scripting interfaces give developers the ability to program distributed contracts on top of the bitcoin and competing blockchain networks. They highlight the ability to create programmable contracts, which allow developers to programmatically manage value exchange with an unprecedented level of control, which will simplify and minimize the trust required in many common transactions done today. They highlight use cases that have emerged around standardized contract types, such as micropayment channels, which are indicative of a broad range of applications that are now possible, such as mobile wallets, gifting, and social media value exchange.this will be the fact that the majority of customers now prefer online or mobile banking.
Internet access (all devices, but especially mobile) with customer centricity, 
affordability, ease of use and affordable secure access anywhere, especially at point of sale, are becoming the key drivers.
•	Mobile is a lead driver for change in payments technology – specifically the 
remittances and money transfer markets. Nearly half of all online sales are now made over mobile devices (IMRG Capgemini)
7.
•	“Business models, technology, and consumer behaviors are changing. Electronic payments, digital commerce, predictive analytics, and mobility are converging, along with contextual marketing, digital advertising, couponing, loyalty, and social media. The opportunities to enable magical new commerce experiences for consumers and more meaningful interactions between brands, merchants, and their customers are endless” (Paul Galant, VeriFone).
•	Dramatic uptake of smartphone devices and mobile phone penetration in emerging markets (not just the “unbanked”). 67% of the people on the planet now have a mobile phone conducting an estimated 300bn transactions valued at $860bn. There are already 1bn mobile banking users (Mobile Commerce revolution).
8
M-Pesa – Lessons for Integrated FinTech + 
Digital Currency Merchant and Consumer Adoption?
A leading example, and great case study for alternative digital transaction adoption, 
is the emerging market success story in Kenya, namely M-Pesa.
It was originally designed by Safricom (Vodafone) as a system to allow microfinance-
loan repayments to be made by phone, reducing the costs associated with handling cash and thus making possible lower interest rates. Once you have signed up, you pay money into the system by handing cash to one of 40,000 agents (typically a street vendor or a corner shop selling airtime). It has since broadened to become a general money-transfer scheme – loans and savings products, bills and salary payments, etc. Having established a base of initial users, M-Pesa then benefited from network effects: the more people who used it, the more it made sense for others to sign up for it.
Blockchain
Value ChainValue Exchange
Network Infrastructure & APIs
Document Storage & Delivery
Digital Content
App Development
Marketplaces
Smart Contracts
Financial
Currency Exchange
& Remittances
Syndicated Loans
Private Shares
Treasury Repos
Loyalty Points
Interbank Payments
P2P Transfers
InsuranceAsset Registries
Gold & Diamonds
Property Titles/Land RecordsData StorageSupply Chain ManagementLogisticsIOTSecurity
Digital Identity ManagementAuthentication & AuthorizationCompliance/KYC/AMLGovernance & RiskManagementAuditing
Figure:   The value chain
6 https://www.kpcbedge.com.7 http://internetretailing.net/2015/12/45-of-ecommerce-sales-now-made-via-mobile-devices/.
8 http://ptgmedia.pearsoncmg.com/images/9780789751546/samplepages/9780789751546.pdf. Digital Currencies and Mobile 
Transactions
Branchless banking is the key distribution channel strategy used for delivering 
financial services without relying on bank branches and is also being used as a separate channel strategy that entirely forgoes bank branches. Overriding even 
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains215Interoperability – The Integration 
Challenge (and Opportunity)
The challenge is that emerging financial technologies do not trust or have access to 
established financial institutions and services, whilst the latter in turn do not trust or have access to the emerging technologies. Nevertheless, both worlds are already exploring strategic partnerships and relationships and soon we will see a large-scale convergence and meshing of legacy and emergent digital finance offerings and delivery platforms. Blockchain-based “proof of concepts” are sprouting up everywhere. Imagine centralized meets cloud, meets distributed solutions. Here lies the true competitive advantage and innovation for digital finance players.
interoperabilityDistributed
(on the edge)
- Network deployment
(nodes)
- Points of access
(mobile devices)
Decentralized
- Open source
- Anonymous
- Operate autonomously
- Off-network P2P
transfersCentralized
- Issuing Authority
- Services aggregation
- Closed User Groups
Figure:   Distributed deployment challengesThe digital currency of the future might take on many forms. It will break down barriers and increase access to increasingly large audiences across geographies, with different levels of income. Crypto-currency innovations initiated by the bitcoin protocol and its later derivations have opened up a range of applications and potential solutions for an increasingly globalized economy, inviting further exploration. Emerging digital finance models and technologies for financial inclusion can positively impact those who are “unbanked” or excluded, creating greater access, equality and efficiencies in established markets, and delivering a digital finance future that is “flexible, frictionless, and almost free” for all.216
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChains216Blockchain and  
Crypto-currencies
By Adam Hayes
Co-Founder & CEO, ChainLink
and Paolo Tasca  
Economist, Deutsche Bundesbank
The notion of an entirely digital form of money has captured the curiosity of 
economists, computer scientists, and philosophers alike from the time the computer was still young. There was, however, always the nagging problem that a currency consisting entirely of ones and zeroes could be exactly copied over and over again, the same way that ones and zeroes allowed for the infinite duplication of audio in the form of compact discs. What good is money that could be counterfeited at will? The solution, which spawned bitcoin and its various daughter digital currencies, was the marriage of cryptography and decentralized networks. Both technologies had existed independently: cryptography, useful in encoding email messages, sensitive information and digital files; decentralized, distributed networks with ARPANET giving birth to the internet.
How Does Digital Currency Work?1
In 2009, Satoshi Nakamoto satisfied the long-held curiosity of economists, computer scientists, and philosophers with the creation of Bitcoin. The system relies on a disparate network of participants, each trying to essentially break an encrypted message. Rather than the nodes of the network working together in cooperation, Nakamoto put them in competition with each other to solve this puzzle with the first to do so winning a prize: a block of newly minted bitcoins. This became known as “mining” for bitcoin. Furthermore, the system was hard-wired with a certain rule at the outset: a new block would be found on average once every ten minutes; if more participants enter the competition and the time to solve the puzzle shrinks to say eight or nine minutes, the difficulty of the puzzle will be increased to re-establish that target time.
1 For more on how digital currency works, see https://bitcoin.org/en/faq. To avoid confusion, we 
use Bitcoin (singular with an upper case letter B) to label the protocol, software, and community, 
and bitcoins (with a lower case b) to label units of the currency.Let us take a roulette wheel at a casino as an analogy for bitcoin mining, where the 
prize for landing on double-zero is a block of bitcoins. There are 36 numbers on the wheel, plus a zero slot and a double-zero. The chance of the ball landing on double-zero is one out of 38. The casino owner knows that 38 games of roulette can be played over a 10-minute interval, and wants to ensure that there is only one winner per given interval. As one final rule, in our hypothetical example, only one player can sit at a single roulette table at a time.
A second player enters the casino and sits down at a second roulette table. The 
owner of the casino is upset to see that twice as many games can be played in any given period, and that in fact he is now paying out to two winners every 10 minutes. The casino owner restores his target payout interval by increasing the number of slots on each roulette table. As a third, fourth, tenth, hundredth etc. person walks in the casino to play at their own private roulette table, the casino owner must keep increasing the size of the wheels.
It is important to remember that each spin of a roulette wheel is an independent 
trial: the chances of the ball landing on a black number do not increase merely because a string of red numbers has occurred. Bitcoin mining, and our increasing roulette wheel size analogy, is also a series of independent trials performed in tandem by competing players. Good luck may produce two winners in a row, even though the odds have increased to one out of 38,000 instead of 38. But just as in a fair coin tossed over and over again, the long-run average will revert to the expected mean, and our casino owner – and bitcoin miners – can always expect a payout once every 10 minutes.
Bitcoin mining serves a dual purpose; it is not merely the method of introducing 
newly created bitcoins. Of more importance, it serves to validate and confirm each transaction on the network, creating a tamper-proof data structure underlying the system known as the blockchain. The blockchain is essentially a public ledger which everybody mining for bitcoins has a copy of. Every time there is a winner, each copy of the blockchain is updated and all the transactions that have taken place in between this winner and the last are recorded indelibly into it.
Again, consider the roulette wheel. Not only are there people playing simultaneous 
games of roulette, but there are also non-players who are simply taking side bets on the action. Only when there is a double-zero will those side bet transactions be confirmed.217
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChainsBitcoin works in much the same way: miners compete with each other to solve a 
puzzle just like the roulette players hope to score double-zero. As more miners enter the game, the problem gets more difficult to solve, maintaining a 10-minute interval between creating new bitcoins. All the while, people are transacting with bitcoin to buy and sell goods and services, to speculate on its price, and to pay wages. Each time a miner solves the puzzle, all of those accumulated transactions are validated and confirmed in the blockchain. The important difference between bitcoin and our casino is that bitcoin has no owner, and no central authority to oversee it. Rather, those rules were hard-wired into the initial code and agreed upon by its participants.
While that is all very clever, it is fairly self-serving: bitcoin mining finds new bitcoins 
and at the same time validates and confirms internal bitcoin-bitcoin transactions. But what if this same powerful time-stamped validation engine could be harnessed to confirm and verify external non-bitcoin specific transactions?
Bitcoin 2.0 and Future Trends
Until now, the most important manifestation of blockchain technologies has been Bitcoin. However, anything that requires trust or proof is a good candidate for the blockchain, as bitcoin miners will naively validate and confirm those transactions too – because those miners are always trying to solve the next block and earn bitcoins as a reward. Title of ownership, deeds, contracts of all shapes and sizes, and notary, are examples of information that can be permanently recorded into the blockchain – and which can unambiguously be transferred to subsequent owners without the need for a central authority. This has huge ramifications for how business is transacted and may prove disruptive to everything from the legal to the financial sector.
Indeed, after the first wave of early enthusiasts and overly ideological bitcoiners 
“blinded” by their belief in a rapid displacement of the US dollar and other hard currencies, the Bitcoin community started focusing on alternative applications of the underlying blockchain technology.
2
2 On this matter, an interesting comment was given by the Reddit CEO (Mr Yishan Wong), who 
praised the technology but called out the bitcoin community for being overly ideological. See 
http://www.coindesk.com/reddit-ceo-thinks-world-dogecoin-slams-crazy-bitcoiners/.3 See Paolo Tasca (2015), Digital Currencies: Principles, Trends and Opportunities, ECUREX 
Research Working Paper.
4 See https://cryptocointalk.com /forum/178-scrypt-cryptocoins/.
5 See https://ripple.com.Most of these Bitcoin 2.0 applications are still at their dawn, but they promise 
to improve the architecture of transaction-based industries. We envision four categories of blockchain technologies that will impact the financial industry: digital currencies, asset registries, application stacks, and asset-centric technologies.
3
Digital Currencies
At the time of writing, there are over 500 alternative altcoins.4 These are digital 
currencies much like bitcoin, with specific monetary supply mechanisms and transaction networks. We glimpse a future characterized by the creation and diffusion of community-based digital currencies that will be used in closed-form environments as tools for internal rewarding, customer loyalty programmes, or incentive and governance schemes. The communities will either be organized via state institutions or by private corporations who will issue their own specifically branded “coins”. There are already platforms which allow anyone with a rudimentary knowledge of software programming to create their own digital currency according to their own unique rules and usage limits within the community and the organization. Moreover, there are already payment networks such as Ripple, enabling various digital currencies to be sent easily between members.
5 
In the near future, it will be possible for every single smartphone user on the planet to possess a digital wallet for each branded coin, instantly exchangeable in the form for example of loyalty points, for other altcoins, or for hard currencies. This all functions under the auspices of a unique global market with a distributed, decentralized clearing mechanism. This will massively upgrade transaction efficiency and increase the currency-utility of reward.
Asset Registries
These applications refer to the possibility of linking real assets (stocks, bonds, certificates, etc.) to a digital token which can then be exchanged among network users by simultaneously transferring ownership of the underlying asset. The changes of ownership are automatically registered and recorded in a multi-asset public ledger without the need for a central authority or for any institution to provide clearing and settlement services. For the time being, the technology still needs refinement. Critical issues include the potential for overloading the blockchains 218218
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChainswith additional external data (a phenomenon referred to as “blockchain bloat”) 
that will require additional mining power and create scalability problems.6 Thus, 
although asset registry applications have already been brought to the market (examples include Mastercoin (now OmniLayer),
7 ColoredCoin,8 Namecoin,9 and 
Counterparty10) at the moment, the banking industry at large cannot fully exploit the 
potentialities of this technology. The good news is that solutions such as sidechains are being implemented to solve the bloat problem, and in the near future asset registry applications will indeed be a common tool used by the whole of the finance industry.
11
Application Stacks
These are “non-currency” blockchain-based platforms that will be used for the development and execution of complete applications on top of decentralized networks.
By complete applications we mean Distributed Autonomous Organizations (DAOs). 
Any business organization can be defined as a combination of a set of properties and also a set of rules which govern the roles of, and interaction among, the individuals composing the organization. The idea of DAOs takes the traditional concept of business organization, decentralizes it, and encodes a division of labour between Artificial Intelligence agents and humans under the control of a verifiable and incorruptible set of enterprise rules. Thus, DAOs are established by employing a decentralized network of autonomous agents, each of which perform output maximizing production functions according to pre-established rules which are auditable, open-source, and distributed across the processing power of their stakeholders (who are humans or even other DAOs). DAOs are the most complex form of decentralized automation to date. Simpler forms of this concept consist of smart contracts, autonomous agents, decentralized applications, and decentralized organizations.
12 Current application stacks that allow for implementation of 
decentralized automation are NXT, Ethereum, and Eris, which distinguish themselves based on their core focus.
13
Asset-Centric Technologies
Asset-centric technologies are based on a new concept of distributed consensus which gets rid of the expensive and resource-wasting proof-of-work system which is the default consensus mechanism utilized by Bitcoin.
14 Stellar, Ripple, Hyperledger, 
and Namecoin are the most famous examples of asset-centric technologies.15 
These decentralized ledger infrastructures allow for the exchange of real assets like currencies, metals, stock, or bonds and in some cases even without the need to use a native digital token as in the case of Hyperledger.
16 The element that 
distinguishes these asset-centric technologies with respect to the other blockchain-based technologies described above is the fact that these represent distributed exchangers where network users can exchange among themselves various heterogeneous real assets.
Conclusions
An entirely digital, decentralized, peer-to-peer currency is now a reality. Bitcoin has ushered in the crypto-currency age, for better or for worse. The potential for crypto-currencies to revolutionize money and disrupt finance is enormous, but it is only the beginning. Perhaps even more important is the blockchain, the distributed ledger data structure which crypto-currencies rely on. Capital investment in blockchain-related start-ups is a recent trend that started only in 2012; however, since then, the annual growth rate of investment, 150% year over year, is faster than even the dot-com boom. Blockchain applications spanning a number of sectors promise to 
6 In June 2015, it was announced that the maximum block size for the Bitcoin blockchain would 
be increased to 8 MB.
7 See http://www.omnilayer.org/.
8 See https://www.coloredcoins.org and https://www.coinprism.com. 
9 See https://namecoin.info/.
10 See https://www.counterparty.com. 
11 Sidechains are separate and distinct from the main bitcoin blockchain, but which would be 
interoperable with a two-way peg. This could allow for the transfer of assets between the side-
chain and the main blockchain, without eating much storage space. See the paper “Enabling Blockchain Innovations with Pegged Sidechains” at http://www.blockstream.com/sidechains.pdf.12 More information of decentralized automations can be found here: https://blog.ethereum.
org/2014/05/06/daos-dacs-das-and-more-an-incomplete-terminology-guide/.
13 See http://nxt.org/, https://ethereum.org/, and https://erisindustries.com/. 
14 By one estimate from 2014, Bitcoin consumed as much electric power as the entire country of 
Ireland. See http://karlodwyer.github.io/publications/pdf/bitcoin_KJOD_2014.pdf.
15 See https://www.stellar.org, https://ethereum.org, http://hyperledger.com/, and https://name-
coin.info/.
16 Unlike Bitcoin, Stellar, Namecoin, or Ripple, Hyperledger does not have an in-built digital 
currency but at the same time it guarantees a distributed ledger base which gives each partici-pant freedom in choosing which combinations of other participants to trust.219
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChainschange the way companies and people transact, send payments, sign contracts, 
transfer ownership of things, and much, much more.
The hope is that this new technology will instead turn the digital divide, among and 
within our countries, into digital opportunities. The reduction of transaction costs and the elimination of costly – and sometimes obscure – layers of intermediation have the potential to favour financial inclusion for the benefit of society.However, blockchain technologies will also introduce new risks to users and market participants as well as new risks to financial integrity: e.g., fraud, money laundering, and cyber-crimes. Therefore new forms of “tech regulation” should be designed and implemented in order to boost innovation and guarantee market stability in those new areas that will be affected by the adoption of blockchain technologies.
220220
Cry Pto-Curren Cies and Blo CkChainsThe Future of 
FinTech10This concluding part of the book aims to chart the future course of FinTech over the next 
decade. What will happen to the global insurance and banking industry? Will they survive and maybe even thrive by learning from successful transformation programmes by tech giants and the innovation culture of FinTech start-ups today? What will happen to FinTech firms who disrupt the finance industry? Will they be the winners, having responded to new client demands faster and better than anybody else? Will existing banking and insurance services become “utilities”? If big data is the competitive advantage will the data which is controlled by incumbents within their organization be more valuable or will it be the data outside their IT firewalls which can be analysed by FinTech entrepreneurs using cutting-edge artificial intelligence, machine learning, and analytical data mining solutions?
Everybody agrees that collaboration is key. Are Application Programming Interfaces 
(APIs) the secret tool to implement partnerships in practice? Could APIs even help banks to escape their legacy systems and compete at start-up speed? Will we see global FinTech banks emerge which – thanks to their own banking licence – will no longer rely on established players or be at the mercy of long procurement processes? Will “FinTech Marketplace Banking” reverse the existing value chain completely where established players become actual suppliers to FinTech banks?
To serve customers well in the long term, should we forget what customers ask for today 
and figure out what they would be asking for if they knew it was possible? Disruptive technologies such as mobile, blockchain, the Internet of Things, and wearables enable so many new financial services that we are really only constrained by our imagination. In order to look into the future we have asked a diverse group of authors ranging from FinTech entrepreneurs, Challenger Banks, established banks, consulting companies, tech giants, and global FinTech thought leaders what to expect and how stakeholders in the FinTech ecosystem could respond to guarantee their successful future.How Emerging Technologies 
Will Change Financial Services
By Manoj K. Kashyap  
Assurance Partner, Banking and Capital Markets, Global FinTech Leader, PwC
and Grégory Weber
Director and FinTech Leader, PwC Luxembourg
The financial services sector is in the nascent stage of digital disruption. Its main 
functions are the same today as they were yesterday – people use financial services to exchange money, to save or invest, to finance, or to insure against risk. All financial services are a response to these four basic needs, and this will not change. What is changing, though, is the way these needs are being addressed. New technologies are delivering convenience, speed, and volume in quantities we have never seen before, making financial transactions easier, cheaper, and more convenient. As Jeff Stewart, CEO of Lenddo, an online platform which uses data from social media and other sites to form a profile of the borrower, declared: “Financial Services is about to have its Napster moment”. FinTech is, indeed, reshaping the financial services industry, which will undoubtedly look very different tomorrow than it does today. And the penetration of technology-driven companies in the financial sector is set to go deeper, since finance offers them an ocean of opportunities.
Many Opportunities for FinTech 
Are Yet to be Explored
By the year 2020, over 1 million payment transactions will take place every minute 
in the world.1 While cash still remains the primary method of payment for low value 
transactions, we have observed a declining trend in its use during recent decades in conjunction with increased adoption of new alternative payment methods. On a large scale, governments are taking notice of the cost differential between cash and non-cash solutions: cash can cost up to 1.5% of a country’s GDP ,
2 which is around five times more 
than the cost of non-cash alternatives.3 The volume of non-cash payment transactions will be driven by global GDP growth, especially in SAAAME (South America, Africa, Asia, and Middle East) countries, the ongoing improvement of payment systems infrastructure, as well as the continuing growth of e-commerce at the global level.
As a matter of fact, according to eMarketer, B2C e-commerce sales are set to 
reach US$2.36tn by 2018 soaring from US$1.23tn in 2013. In this regard, mobile represents a powerful vehicle for digital sales and we expect the global value of mobile payments to increase to US$1,271.8bn by 2020
4 (from US$235.4bn in 
2013). On the other hand, the digitalization of currencies and their acceptance by customers and merchants is on the rise. Crypto-currencies such as bitcoin, Ripple, and hundreds of other crypto-technologies will surely foster the digitalization of the payment systems and the globally-connected economy.
5
Boosted by increasing infrastructure requirements and growing numbers of middle classes, global financing needs will exceed three times the world GDP by 2020. While alternative ways of financing such as PE/VC, crowdfunding, and P2P lending are still small markets, accounting for a mere 0.5% of European GDP, they have been growing at a fast pace in recent years. In this respect, global crowdfunding gathered a strong momentum in 2014, expanding by 167% to reach US$16.2bn raised, up from US$6.1bn in 2013.
6 Concerning P2P lending, Lending Club, the largest of the 
marketplace lenders, reached over around US$13.4bn in loan issuance at the end of September 2015, compared to US$7.6bn at the end of 2014.
7
Investable assets will reach US$200tn by 2020.8 The highest increase will come 
from mass affluent and high net worth individuals (HNWI). More specifically, mass affluent assets in SAAAME regions will more than double from 2012 to 2020.
9 The 
importance of institutional investors is also on the rise and we anticipate that the assets of pension funds, insurance companies and sovereign wealth fund (SWF) will reach US$100.5tn (a 5.8% CAGR
10 from 2013 to 2020).11
1 PwC Market Research Centre based on Goldman Sachs data.
2 MasterCard Advisors’ Cashless Journey, September 2013.
3 PwC analysis based on ECB data.4 PwC Market Research Centre based on Goldman Sachs data.
5 See also PwC, Virtual Currencies: Out of the deep web into the light, 2014.
6 Massolution, Crowdfunding Industry report, 2015.
7 https://www.lendingclub.com/info/statistics.action.
8 PwC Market Research Centre based on Credit Suisse data.
9 Ibid.
10 Compound Annual Growth Rate.
11 PwC Market Research Centre. Past data based on Credit Suisse, SWF Institute, The City UK, 
OECD, and Insurance Europe.226
The Fu Ture o F FinTech226A rise in investible assets translates into increased demand for asset management, 
which should support the growth of automated financial advisory solutions. On a global basis, robo advisors directly managed about US$19bn as of December 2014, according to a study by Corporate Insight,
12 and this figure is set to grow 
since virtual advisors are providing personalized portfolio allocation, tax aware portfolio design, smart rebalancing to maintain a target risk, and 24/7 access with lower fees than other types of advisors.
13 Market players will also increasingly 
take advantage of every new piece of information for investment decision-making, distribution, compliance, and reporting purposes.
Global Insurance Premiums  
Will Amount to US$800 per  capita in 2020
14
The global value of insurance premiums will reach US$6.2tn by 2020 growing at 
a 4.2% CAGR from 2013 to 2020. The highest growth will come from developing markets such as Asia-Pacific, Latin America, the Middle East, and Africa. However, Europe and the US will remain the two most important regions accounting for 63% of global insurance premiums by 2020. The long-term opportunities for insurers in a world where people are living longer and have more wealth to protect are evident. But they are also bringing fresh competition, both from within the insurance industry, and a raft of new entrants coming in from outside. The entrants include companies from other financial services sectors, technology giants, health care companies, venture capital firms, and nimble new start-ups.
15
Telematics (a term that refers to any device which merges telecommunications and informatics), for instance, offers new applications to manage risk and enhance customer relationships. On a global basis, the value of telematics insurance soared from EUR 3.4bn in 2009 to EUR 13.5bn in 2014, a 31.8% CAGR over the period.
16 Property & Casualty insurers are particularly keen to embrace this technology, which allows them to match premiums more closely with actual risk. On the other side, drivers benefit from the opportunity to lower their insurance rates by driving more safely. In addition, governments in various countries have announced plans to launch telematics-related mandates on services such as emergency call and stolen vehicle tracking (e.g. the eCall initiative in the EU and the mandatory “Black Box” law for all new cars in Italy).
The Future of FinTech Largely 
Depends on Five Game-changers
In this highly dynamic environment we have identified five main game-changers 
(customers’ experience, Fin & Tech connection, data monetization, crypto-technologies, and regulation) which are set to influence the future development of the financial industry, but the definitive impact of those factors remains unknown.
Customer Experience (CX)
Internet, mobility, social networking, and the rise of price comparison websites have changed the game over the past decade and have created a new generation of customers who demand simplicity, speed, and convenience in their interactions with financial providers and even with their peers (e.g. P2P models). FinTech is placing clients at the centre of its business model. It is moving towards strengthening front-end tools and adopting a multi-channel approach in order to provide clients with multiple touch points and enriching customers’ experience. “We understand our customers are changing the way they consume financial products, and we focus on enriching our value proposition to them, looking for opportunities in the areas of Personal Financial Management Services (PFMs), Blockchain, API-based banking,
17 insurance and more.”18
The increasing flexibility of IT architectures, open networks, and API19 is facilitating 
a dynamic and diverse financial services environment. This raises a critical question for incumbents: to what extent will they be able to adapt their business models and IT infrastructures to cope with this new competitive landscape.
14 PwC Market Research Centre based on Credit Suisse data.12 Corporate Insight, Transcending the Human Touch, 2014.
13 PwC/CACEIS, Reshaping the retail fund distribution – Winning strategies and tactics in a 
disrupted environment, 2015.
15 PwC, Insurance 2020 & beyond: Necessity is the mother of reinvention, 2015.
16 PwC Market Research Centre based on GSMA data.17 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
18 Santander Innoventures website.
19 API = application program interface, is a set of routines, protocols, and tools for building 
software applications. The API specifies how software components should interact.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech227Fin & Tech Connection
The connection of Finance and Technology is producing a collaborative spirit in 
both sectors that is blurring the traditional business lines. Experts in the financial sector bring to the table a specific knowledge such as risk management, financial analysis, and regulatory compliance, while IT players contribute with technological expertise and an understanding of the customer’s experience in a digital age. “Silicon Valley is coming […] we are going to work hard to make our services as seamless and competitive as theirs. And we also are completely comfortable with partnering where it makes sense.”
20 Going forward, what will be the dominant 
approach for combining expertise in both finance and technology? Will players enhance in-house capabilities by themselves, by outsourcing, by partnering, or by acquiring strategic stakes?
Data Monetization
Financial services providers are sitting on a veritable goldmine of untapped data which will play an important role in FinTech development. As a matter of fact, the emergence of powerful, low-cost analytical tools and computer technology enables companies to mine big data, identify emerging trends, and develop unique insights. These insights can translate into better, faster, smarter business decisions – and can drive the development of breakthrough products, reveal hidden markets, and spark other innovations that give companies a competitive edge.
21
The question is: will data analytics no longer be a competitive advantage, but rather a competitive disadvantage for those who do not embrace it? And most importantly, how can financial institutions secure clients’ data privacy and strengthen trust in the industry?
Crypto-technologies (“Blockchain”)
The truly disruptive innovation will certainly come from crypto-technologies or blockchain.
22 In fact, these may not only change the way we do payments but 
20 Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan, Annual Letter to Shareholders, 2014.
21 PwC, Capitalizing on the promise of Big Data, 2013.
22 A public and unbreakable ledger that serves as a record of transactions that was first brought 
by bitcoin.23 The Wall Street Journal, “UBS to Open Blockchain Research Lab in London”, April 2015.also the whole trading and settlement world. According to the Bank of England, the technology could have far-reaching implications and its impact on the financial industry could be much wider than payments. “Many have come to believe that this technology can be adapted to record and verify financial transactions, from clearing securities to making cross-border payments.”
23
That said, will the risks and uncertainty related to virtual currencies (e.g. Anti-Money Laundering (AML), Know Your Client (KYC) issues) prevent a further adoption of crypto-technologies? If adopted, to what extent can these technologies trigger simplification of banking processes and cost structure? Finally, to what extent will “smart contracts”, which are programs that contain conditionality and can automatically execute the terms of the contract if the conditions are met, be applied in the financial sector?
Adapt (to) Regulation
Finally, the future of FinTech will largely depend on its capacity to cope with the highly demanding regulatory framework of the financial sector. On the other hand, regulators will need to increase clarification and ensure a harmonized level playing field in order to protect customers and remove barriers to market developments. In closing, regulation may become either the catalyst for the development of FinTech or its main inhibitor.
FinTech firms have already managed to successfully penetrate the financial 
services industry by leveraging innovation to deliver better service to customers. FinTech now has the potential to bring a more radical change within this industry and become a core constituent of its infrastructure and processes, thereby boosting the speed and agility of financial services.228
The Fu Ture o F FinTech228The Future of Financial 
Services
By Axel Apfelbacher 
FinTech Thought Leader
The following dialogue between Artus, a digital financial adviser of the future, and 
a User of a very specific banking service (mortgage financing) outlines the major concepts of the (retail) finance industry of the future. After each sequence, the relevant concepts are described with respect to their impact on the interaction between users of financial services and the future ecosystem of providers. These impacts will not be limited to the chosen example but apply to any type of financial transaction.
The Future of Financing
“Artus, please organize the mortgage for our future home we picked an hour ago.”
“… Mortgage processed … I have contracted with Crowdlending-Pool Europe III for a 20-year contract. You can move house on Monday, the MoveBots will be there at 7 am.”
Financing the purchase of a new home will become a very smooth, very rapid 
process, outpacing current processing speeds by more than 99%. Following the order book logic of stock exchanges, mortgages will be made visible to multiple parties interested in taking a lending position in a specific (real estate) market. All criteria that an interested borrower requires to close a transaction are captured by Digital Financial Assistants (DFAs) who compare various offers available on the lending exchange against these parameters which have been defined by the users of these services. Available cash flows for repaying the mortgage, the existing income and wealth structure, and overall financial goals for the investor are known to the DFA who can then compare all available offers and execute a (smart) contract on the basis of all available data.
Crowdlending will become a significant additional channel for accumulating 
and allocating cash flows that individual investors are awarding to crowdlending pools which will be organized by platforms and insured through credit default swap arrangements against loan losses. Despite the drag on gross margins as a consequence of insurance, crowdlending will be very competitive due to lower technology costs for cash flow matching and analysis of borrowers’ credit qualities. After reaching the trough of disillusionment in 2017, crowdlending will develop into a standard financing structure along more traditional ways of capital accumulation.
The Future of Identity
“Wonderful. Any additional input required?”
“No, all parameters are available. Your avatar ID will be entered into the global asset database as owner of your new home in Madrid on Monday. Please validate the transac-tion within 24 hours at the global ID centre on Lombard Street (former Bank of England).”
Blockchain technology will change the nature of financial transactions as it leads to 
fundamental changes in the global financial architecture. Where current financial data management is driven by discreet databases inside financial institutions that communicate with one another through secured communications channels, the future of financial transaction processing will be a world of one or multiple global asset data bases. These databases will store all financial data of financial market participants that choose to use these cheaper and easier to use transaction engines. Following the blockchain logic, these databases will be distributed around the globe and transactions will require validation from all or at least a qualified majority of these databases to be executed.
This distributed ledger system is designed to reduce the likelihood of hacking as 
the amount of computing power necessary to break the system is vast. However, it comes at the price of having all financial data distributed across a global network of databases that are owned by potentially untrustworthy market participants. Therefore, a blockchain world will require either an intermediary or the use of pseudonyms in financial transactions to avoid full financial disclosure to the outside world. Given the need of regulators for that kind of transparency, a global blockchain implementation mandates either intermediaries to step in and comply with KYC rules (similar to today’s practice) or a translation engine that allows the regulators to interpret the pseudonymic blockchain ledger entries through the use of an ID database to maintain AML processes. Both concepts are extant today, and may continue to be so in the future, although there may be a slight preference for the intermediary model.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech229Furthermore, users of financial services will have the option to determine a 
transactional threshold as well as specific types of transactions for which a separate validation process will be required. This may take place in outlets that used to be bank branches which have now turned into ID validation centres. Here, the identity of individual market participants will be checked through a comparison of digital and non-digital features and tokens that are designed to generate proof of one’s identity. Re-entry of such an analogue element for (at least) large transactions will decrease the likelihood of system-wide security breaches and exploits that threaten the validity of the overall financial system.
The Future of Money
“Artus, please display our financial status.”
“The total processing fees of 1.4% of transaction value will be transferred with the 
purchase price on Monday. Your monthly mortgage charge of 1,957 ePounds will be debited on the 1st of every month. You are committing 27% of your net income. Includ-ing your normalised level of expenses, you’ll have saved an adequate amount of money to cover the tuition fees for your children by 2021.”
The issuance of electronic currency by the national banks around the world 
is a consequence of the technological capabilities derived from blockchain technology. National governments and supranational financial market committees will push for an implementation of fully transparent global asset databases that enable real-time tracking of financial flows. Cash will probably remain for a very long time a parallel and anonymous transaction mechanism, however most transactions will become available on these online networks due to the ease of use and transaction speed of globally organized asset databases. Therefore, the issuance of electronic currency (e.g. “ePounds”), controlled by the central banks of participating countries, will become a standard way of managing the monetary base of a currency.
When asked why they implemented such an all-encompassing digital currency regime, 
central banks, regulators, and tax agencies will refer to the auditability and traceability of financial flows as well as the lower transactional costs associated with the use of official e-currencies. Such transparency will require new governance mechanisms to balance transparency and freedom in a world of ubiquitous surveillance.The Future of Saving and 
Consumption
“Artus, is there any room to manoeuvre? I’d like to take my family on an extended 
holiday in Africa.”
“Your savings rate is 10% of net income. The rate to achieve your net wealth target by 
the age of 57 is an annualized 8.2%. May I recommend a wonderful resort in Portugal instead who are looking for new customers and are offering 4 weeks for your family at a bargain price?”
The question of whether to use available cash resources for saving or consumption 
will be increasingly answered by DFAs, relying on the one hand on inputs we have given them which reflect our consumption versus saving preferences and the importance of reaching our financial goals. On the other hand, these assistants will tap all available resources, mainly through product information that is available online, to suggest the most fitting price/product mix that matches as closely as possible our financial position as well as our willingness to spend money.
There will be an ecosystem of independent vs. dependent DFAs, reflecting the 
charging model of the providers that will live off usage fees or referral fees/advertising revenues from providers of the products and services that are being channelled through the DFAs’ analysis engine. Some DFAs will offer their users the choice of whether they are willing to pay for their services with money or the (restricted or unrestricted) use of anonymized transactional and other data for advertising purposes. New property rights for personal data will finally enable the owner of such data to determine the degree to which such data can and shall be disclosed to outside parties and will finally put a price on the use of such data by external parties.
The trade-off between the immediate use of cash resources and saving such 
resources for future uses will turn to a more long-term perspective for those users with longer-term financial goals that they enable the DFA to compare against immediate spending desires. The individual user will still be able to overrule the Digital Assistant (DA) but the nagging voice talking about the validity of the longer-term goals will at least put the next purchase into a wider context, potentially delaying such purchase for another day. Thus, the saving vs. consumption decision will be based on a more sophisticated financial outlook provided by an unbiased DA.230
The Fu Ture o F FinTech230The Future of Financial Literacy
“Artus, the resort looks fabulous. Can you please inform my boss about my intention to 
take an extended holiday and arrange accommodation and transport after approval?”
“… Holiday request processed … and approved. Enjoy your trip. Your flight details are 
available on your Watchlet. Please remember to take your annual financial education test next month as your license will expire on 17 May.”
As intermediaries are squeezed out of the financial value chain, replaced by 
Digital Assistants who base their decision making on inputs from individual market participants, the current approach of financial regulation that focuses on regulating intermediaries will be challenged. Therefore, regulation will be increasingly asking for proofs of financial literacy and will make the nature of financial transactions dependent upon the results of obligatory tests designed to display the level of understanding of an individual with respect to financial knowledge. Without such testing, financial regulation will struggle to capture all relevant aspects of future financial transactions, whilst providers of Digital Assistants will design their business models to avoid a position of financial risk taking in the decision-making process. Thus, the individual will become the focus of regulatory action and knowledge of financial flows and the impact of specific decisions on financial well-being will become increasingly important to avoid disastrous holes in the (retail) financial architecture.
The nature of financial services and the global financial architecture will evolve 
substantially within the next decade and will move towards a technology-enabled, highly automated advisory service that takes into account all available sources and uses of money that are still existing in the markets, making them available to every participant and in language that can be understood by everyone. These DFAs will be highly personalized, potentially issuer-independent, and highly interconnected to generate the best available financial results for their users and execute transactions automatically to reduce processing time and effort. The issuance of money by central banks will be transformed through the use of blockchain technology and will turn the transfer of money and all other types of financial instruments into real-time experience. Such automation and smart contracting available through the use of DFAs, based on electronic currency databases and transparent financial markets will help individuals make better decisions leading to a more positive financial future for users of these systems.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech231Banking on Innovation  
Through Data
By Dr Marc Torrens 
CIO, Strands Labs
Technology innovation has been vital to the online banking industry since Stanford 
Federal Credit Union offered the world’s first internet banking portal in 1994.1 The 
last few decades have seen the financial industry slowly incorporate internet-based technologies to open up new distribution and operational channels. However, most of that innovation has been around the operational aspects of the bank by incorporating different new digital channels.
Today, the vast majority of banks offer their products and services through internet 
channels such as web platforms or mobile applications. Digital banking allows customers to access almost all financial services from anywhere, at any time.
Banks, however, are still offering essentially the same products and services as 
they did in the 1990s. Compared to other industries such as entertainment, travel, or retail, banks are not yet using these channels to actually change their business model or propose new and more relevant products or services. A few bells and whistles aside, the banking industry has yet to be truly disrupted.
From Financial Product Vendors  
to Solution Providers
The transactional data banks are collecting from millions of customers and the new 
data revolution are the necessary ingredients to disrupt the products and services banks are currently offering. This disruption will shift banks from their current position of vendors of financial products to providers of financial solutions.
For example, a customer that wants to buy his dream car has thousands of 
products available to help him save or borrow money to attain that specific goal. But, the customer would probably like to have a plan to achieve the goal with the right products. So, instead of offering customers a large catalogue of financial products to choose from, banks could offer personalized plans to meet the customer’s specific needs. Financial products should serve as tools that facilitate everyday financial situations. Banks will start offering solutions to life events and situations instead of just the financial tools to overcome them.
Banks are actually very well positioned to do precisely this; they can develop 
technologies that offer financial solutions instead of a catalogue of products by learning from the data they have been collecting for decades. The challenge is to extract meaning from that data and use it to offer the right products at the right time to the right customer. This new knowledge should encode preferences and tastes from customers in a very precise way. These actionable insights can then be used to propose personalized financial solutions to specific customer challenges.
The Data Revolution is Here
So far we have seen how banks are in a uniquely privileged position to take the financial industry where it has never been. However, the outlook is not all sunshine and roses – banks are under a lot of pressure to do this before the giant internet companies beat them to it. Moreover, banks are facing a wave of unprecedented competition from an emerging set of pure FinTech players. Large internet companies and FinTech firms which have been leading the data revolution in other sectors are starting to enter the financial world. Big banks are very well aware of this threat and are starting to take the data revolution seriously. A notable example comes from Francisco Gonzalez, chief executive of BBVA, who stated in an opinion article entitled “Banks need to take on Amazon and Google or die” published in the Financial Times in 2013:
2
Some bankers and analysts think that Google, Facebook, Amazon or the like will not 
fully enter a highly regulated, low-margin business such as banking. I disagree. What is more, I think banks that are not prepared for such new competitors face certain death.
1 See http://www.thefreelibrary.com/_/print/PrintArticle.aspx?id=17104850.2 “Banks need to take on Amazon and Google or Die”, Financial Times, 2 December 2013, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/bc70c9fe-4e1d-11e3-8fa5-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3ojXmfGVg.232
The Fu Ture o F FinTech232So, what is the unique competitive advantage financial institutions have to continue 
leading the innovation in the financial sector? How can they innovate to win the new battle against the Amazon, Apple, Google, and the FinTech start-ups?
What banks have in spades is reliable, quantifiable, and best of all, monetizable 
data. Unfortunately, banks largely lack a culture of internet innovation and the agile, quick-to-market IT organization that forms the DNA of FinTech start-ups and internet giants. The challenge of entering the data revolution from a bank’s perspective is not negligible because core banking systems have been patched for decades and bank organizations have not been designed to rapidly innovate in this space. Internet and data innovation need a very specific type of organization that is a far cry from the way financial institutions operate. Specifically, banks have difficulties to innovate in the data and internet sectors for several reasons:
•	A corporate organization and culture that is not designed for rapid innovation.
Banks have been operating their IT development teams, using what is known in project management as “the waterfall approach” in which requirements are very well defined at the beginning of the project, and the final results must be seen at the end. This way of working is not the most appropriate to promote innovation. Internet companies and start-ups use agile methodologies to quickly iterate and implement new ideas, even though it is riskier as outcomes are often unknown and failure is part of the process.
•	A lack of specialized talent from software engineering and data science.Engineers often prefer to devote their talent to smaller companies where they feel that their contribution has a larger impact, and where the company culture is innovation-based from the outset.
•	A cumbersome, heterogeneous core IT infrastructure.Core banking infrastructures are very often composed of legacy and heterogeneous systems that incur huge costs to keep operational and secure. Building new systems is therefore seen in some scenarios as a second priority but not part of the bank’s core business.
Banks are indeed starting to realize their situation and adapt their way of working to the innovative technology sector, but this may not be enough to compete against the new players.So, How Can Banks Best Leverage 
Their Data Advantage?
The question that arises is then: how exactly can banks innovate to compete with 
these new players (e.g. internet giants and FinTech start-ups) by exploiting their unique data advantage?
Living in a world of interconnected systems in which real value comes more and 
more from data itself, banks must open up and offer well-structured and secure APIs
3 on top of which third-party innovators can develop the next generation of 
financial solutions. This is not a new approach in the technology sector; it has been widely used by the largest technology companies. For example, Apple through their Apple Store ecosystem opened their platform to allow third-party companies to innovate on top of their operating systems and devices. This approach makes Apple platforms much stronger and more powerful even though some of the innovation does not come directly from Apple but from other companies and start-ups. Google is also innovating by opening up services and APIs to other companies.
Banks should follow suit and start offering well-structured and secure APIs to 
open up their data and services to innovative developers. This approach requires middleware applications to interact with the core banking systems to enable developers to access the bank’s services and data through robust APIs. This middleware layer would also involve a simplification of some of the IT infrastructure that currently hinders innovation within banks. With this approach, third-party companies could innovate new financial services while allowing banks to maintain their core business.
The FinTech application development community is endlessly creative and 
agile. Data APIs have the potential to enable tech companies, banks, and their customers to benefit from an increasingly valuable ecosystem of innovative solutions. This new approach not only has great potential to generate new revenue streams, but more importantly enables banks to actually lead the imminent disruption of their industry.
3 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech233ecosystem will be able to offer more personalized solutions based on products 
already offered by banks. These solutions will enable consumers to achieve their specific goals with financial plans tailored to their precise needs and behaviours.
This proposed new ecosystem in which banks focus on their core business and 
allow technology companies to develop new financial services on top of bank data and services will undoubtedly lead to new business models involving the three parties: banks, tech companies, and customers. Although this scenario does not consider banks driving innovation on their own, they will still hold the fuel that powers this innovation ecosystem: data and services.The Future of FinTech: A Tripartite 
Innovation Ecosystem
Data science applied to financial transactional data that banks hold opens up new 
avenues for innovation and will form the basis of the future of FinTech. The key to realizing this innovation is extracting knowledge from data that can be used in new applications, having basically encoded customer needs and preferences to generate actionable insights. Based on this new knowledge, machine learning technologies such as collaborative filtering will be able to offer customers precisely what they need at the moment they need it. Moreover, this new financial 234
The Fu Ture o F FinTech234Why FinTech Banks Will Rule 
the World
By Philippe Gelis 
CEO, Kantox
The financial industry is one of the last large industries that has not been completely 
disrupted by the digital revolution. Nevertheless, it seems that bankers do not have a very different approach to the people who ran the press, hospitality, and airline industries some years ago. Every industry will be “uberized”, but it seems that most bankers still think it will be different in their case, probably because they consider that heavy regulation will protect them and limit the growth, or at least the impact, of FinTech. Bankers simply do not understand that tech companies are agile enough to take advantage of any piece of regulation.
They also continue to believe that customers still trust banks; however, since the 
2008 financial crisis and due to the never-ending financial scandals (Libor-gate, the foreign exchange (FX) fixing scandal, etc.) customers (both individuals and businesses) have a huge appetite for alternative finance. Banks are no longer seen as partners, but rather as pure providers looking after their own interests and short-term profits.
It is a first step for banks to open incubators or to create venture capital (VC) 
funds to invest in start-ups, some of them FinTech, but it is definitely not enough. Most banks look to fund FinTech start-ups that create products to be added on top of their own products, which will make the user experience better, but they almost never invest in products that directly compete with them and therefore could cannibalize their customers or profits. Let me explain why this approach is completely wrong. We are now experimenting with the first wave of FinTech, which sees companies competing with banks on specific products, including, among many more:
•	Loans and credit
•	Payments
•	Foreign exchange and remittance
•	Wealth managementLending Club is by far the global flagship FinTech company. The success of 
its IPO has been a game changer for the entire FinTech sector. So, banks are being pressured by newcomers but – and the “but” is really important – these disrupters are relying on old-school banks for banking services and banking infrastructure (bank accounts, payments, compliance, brokerage, etc.). In other words, they are re-inventing the user experience, the user interface, or the business model but not “the whole thing” (to steal a quote from Marc Andreessen). And by relying on banks to do business, FinTech companies are clients and so generate revenue for the bank. That is a co-optition (co-operative competition) model in which FinTech stays at the mercy of banks – they disrupt banks on one side but they bring them business on the other side. In the end, the banks still win.
It is important to note that many FinTech businesses have evolved from pure 
“P2P models” to “marketplace models” where the liquidity can come from peers or from financial institutions. Lending Club is known for getting up to 80% of its liquidity from financial institutions and not from peers. Here we have a clear example of banks considering it to be more efficient and therefore more profitable for them to lend money through Lending Club than through their outdated branches. In any event, the challenge is more in having deep liquidity than in locating the liquidity.
The second wave of FinTech, to come in the next three years, will be “marketplace 
banking” (or “FinTech banks”). This will be a type of bank based on five simple elements:
1.
 A core banking platform built from scratch.
2. An API1 layer to connect to third parties.
3. A compliance/KYC infrastructure and processes.
4. A banking licence, to be independent from other banks and the ability to hold 
client funds without restrictions.
5. A customer base/CRM, meaning that the FinTech bank will have the customers and a customer support team.
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech235The products directly offered by the FinTech bank will be limited to “funds holding”, 
comprised of:
1. Bank accounts (multi-currency)
2. Credit and debit cards (multi-currency)
3. eWallet (multi-currency).
All other services (investing, trading, and brokerage; wealth management; loans, 
credit, and mortgages; crowdfunding (equity and social); insurance; crypto-currencies; payments; remittances and FX … this list is not exhaustive) will be provided by third parties through the API, including old-school banks, financial institutions, and FinTech companies.
Imagine that you are a client of this “marketplace bank” and that you need a loan. 
You do not really care if the loan is provided to you by Lending Club or Bank of America, what you look for is a quick and frictionless process to get your loan, and the lowest interest rate possible. So, through the API, the “marketplace bank” will consult all its third parties and offer you the loan that best suits you. We can imagine a process in which conditions offered by third parties are non-negotiable but we can also imagine a competitive bidding process to get the best offer for each client at any point in time.
In a recent informal chat with the manager of a global bank’s venture capital arm, 
I finally understood that what banks fear most are technology companies (GAFA and FinTech) owning the customer relationship in the future, and that they become the mere white labels at the back end of the process. In such a scenario, banks do not own the client relationship and merely compete on price, creating significant pressure on their margins and profitability. It is a bit like when a company provides white-labelled products to retailers such as Carrefour or Tesco.
I have been asked several times about this business model and I think it’s a 
no-brainer. It is a simple mix between an access fee to the “marketplace bank” and a revenue-sharing model with the third parties providing additional services. Here we have a completely different approach regarding the relationship with incumbents. FinTech banks, thanks to their banking licence, will no longer rely on any bank to be – and stay – in business, and so will not be at the mercy of incumbents. And what is even more powerful, through the marketplace, incumbents will become “clients” of FinTech banks, so the system will be completely reversed.
We will see banks pay a commission to FinTech banks to serve their customers! 
The beauty of “marketplace banking” is that it competes directly with banks on core banking services without the need to build all the products. Now the question is, what is really needed to launch a “marketplace bank”?
1.
 Technology/API/Compliance/KYC: building the technology is a complex element 
but many people have the skills to do so. So it is definitely not the main barrier.
2. Banking licence: in Europe, the budget to get a banking licence is estimated to be approximately €20 million, though it could cost less or more, depending on the country. But it is not only about money. To be in business you need strong and experienced board members; without them regulators will probably not give you the green light. So you need to be able to convince investors and board members to trust you, based on a PowerPoint presentation, and to bet big on you. I think that we need the first wave of FinTech to be successful, with some exits and big returns, to have people betting a lot of money on “marketplace banking”. As an entrepreneur you need to have demonstrated that you are able to execute and scale a FinTech business to lead that kind of new venture.
3.
 Customer base/CRM: This is the most complex part. How do you attract a critical mass of customers based on a simple offering (accounts + cards + eWallet) that relies on third parties for additional services? You cannot only rely on marketing and having a cool brand to attract hundreds of thousands of new customers if you have nothing really different to offer.
You also need focus: will you target individuals or businesses? Lower end or high net worth individuals? Small, medium, or large businesses? Will you focus on one single country or several? As always, it is all about customers and revenues, so you need a clear sales and marketing plan to quickly scale the customer base. I have been asked several times if the first “marketplace bank” will be launched by an old-school bank (an incumbent) or a FinTech start-up? I definitely think the latter. It is too disruptive and the risk of cannibalization is too high to see a bank assuming the risk.
Since 2010, new banks have been started, mainly in the UK, claiming they are “new 
generation digital banks”. My view is that most of them have no clear differentiator. Being online only or opening 24 hours a day 7 days a week is not appealing 236
The Fu Ture o F FinTech236build it. FinTech banks are inevitable! This is just a blueprint. To pull it off requires 
a lot of hard work. But given that the elements are already available, it is not a question of if but rather when the first pure FinTech banks appear. They will be lean, flexible, and unhindered by legacy systems and will not have the tarnished reputations of the incumbents. They will eat the lunch of the current banking dinosaurs and could well eventually rule the banking world.enough to massively attract new customers. Others banks are looking to offer the “best” current account ever … personally I do not see the point here. The first FinTech bank is still to be invented.
Anyway, most bankers are not worried enough by FinTech to react to its coming 
second wave. This creates a fantastic “window” for us FinTech entrepreneurs to 
The Fu Ture o F FinTech237The FinTech Supermarket – 
The Bank is Dead, Long Live the Bank!
By Spiros Margaris 
Advisor, FinTech Forum; CEO, Margaris Advisory
“It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent that survives. 
It is the one that is the most adaptable to change.”
Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species
The financial institutions of the future will have to be very different from today’s 
structures if they want to remain competitive while satisfying the ever-changing and increasing demands of customers. They will consist of a construct of primarily innovative and independent financial technology (FinTech) companies. These types of institutions provide lower fees in addition to improved performance and user experience. Most importantly, they represent a future that we can and want to believe in.
The new proposed financial institution is called best-in-class FinTech Supermarket, 
and its business model differentiates it from existing financial institutions such as banks, including those that already have partnerships with FinTech firms.
The FinTech Supermarket
The FinTech Supermarket proposal refers to an almost single-minded pursuit of primarily using FinTech firms as financial service providers. It is figuratively a logical development of well-known open fund architecture but with the important distinction that the best FinTech companies are offered in place of the best fund products. It is about the possibility of combining an open selection of the best FinTech partners and the best packages of financial services under one roof. Leading independent and innovative FinTech companies will provide the majority of all financial services.
At the same time, the FinTech Supermarket will always be open to cooperation 
with banks, insurance companies, or technology giants to ensure the best price-performance ratios and services. It is most likely that it will ultimately benefit more from using best-in-class FinTechs, which are more agile and nimble due to their size and more innovative due to their entrepreneurial spirit.
However, a key difference of this new financial institution is that it is not the financial 
industry incumbents which will allow FinTechs to participate in the overall services and business; rather, it will be the other way around. As for the general lack of branches, banks and maybe some FinTechs will eventually only offer them to the privileged clients. Other clients do not need them or simply cannot afford them. Banks that nevertheless retain branches will do so at a high cost to cover the client segment that is still uncomfortable with digital banking, among others. For a good example showing that service partners can work successfully within and for a larger structure, one needs to look no further than large websites that use Google, Bing, or Yahoo! Search as their default search engines. Both the search engine providers and the websites benefit from the partnership, and they both remain independent, strong, and successful in their own right.
Client benefits
•	Access to “open FinTech architecture”, which provides better financial 
services, better price/performance ratios, greater transparency, and subsequently a new and improved customer experience.
•	Pre-selection of service providers, consolidation of services, assets, and ad hoc reports.
•	Lower fees and therefore higher overall returns and savings.
FinTech benefits
•	Access to more customers, allowing critical mass to be reached more quickly, and the creation of a solid foundation for expansion and growth.
•	Maintenance of core competencies and independence: a partnership with or sale to a third party is not precluded.
FinTech supermarket benefits
•	Reduction of costs and the ability to provide customers with independent best-in-class services.238
The Fu Ture o F FinTech238•	Continuous growth and acquisition of up-to-date know-how through financial 
services partnerships.
•	Attractiveness, branding, and competitive advantage will strengthen through higher total returns, greater transparency, and faster adjustments to customer needs.
The business strategy of the FinTech Supermarket will be a “game changer” for financial services. In the insurance industry, it is already common for insurance brokers to compare suitable offers for clients and then put together an optimum package. Moreover, there are already FinTechs which negotiate better bank and insurance fees for their clients. In contrast, the FinTech Supermarket will analyse all matching FinTech services and prices on the market as well as the services of eligible banks, evaluate the findings, and then offer the best possible deal to the client. The FinTech Supermarket will thus create a whole new marketplace. It will increase the range of services for all parties – customers, FinTechs, banks, and insurance companies – which will lead to better services, price-performance ratios, and competitiveness.
The advance of new financial industry competitors and business models such 
as the FinTech Supermarket will bring about disruptive changes that could also be very painful for many participants. It will also naturally stabilize the income of the financial industry at a lower level through greater competition and associated pressure on profit margins.
To survive this trend, financial institutions must provide clear added value and 
unique customer experiences to keep their margins high. The approach taken by Apple can be considered a good future business model for the financial industry since it operates in an extremely competitive industry and has, so far, been very successful in maintaining its high profit margins.
Financial Regulation
Many, if not all, banks and financial institutions harbour the hope that regulation will kill off smaller banking competitors and FinTechs and hold back the technology giants. The remainder think they can reinvent themselves out of the innovation gap problem, but this is not likely to happen. If financial institutions rely on financial regulation to stop their competition, they will be dead in the water.Nevertheless, FinTechs must prepare for the moment when new regulations will strengthen rules and oversight. They would be well advised to comply with regulations from the beginning and consider them to be critical to their prospects of success. They should therefore adapt and act accordingly. We should not forget that regulators and governments know or should know that FinTechs could serve them on many levels, such as improving overall banking customer experiences and banking services. International financial centres that do not understand the importance of FinTechs as one of the key components to determine their futures and to stay relevant will quickly lose their importance as such. Nurturing the FinTech industry, which represents the future, is part of nurturing their own futures.
Millennials
Clients, particularly millennials, want different things out of banking and also expect regulators and politicians to allow FinTechs and any competition to the status quo to prosper. Millennials – also known as Generation Y – are the generation born approximately between 1980 and 2000 and are considered to be one of the most important client segments for financial institutions. Therefore, there is an enormous need for financial institutions to become a viable destination for them, especially as their buying and investment power naturally increases and their business becomes essential to ensuring success.
Many solutions to the needs of millennials will be transferable to other 
generations in some form since we all want improvements in services that fulfil our current or future needs, as well as those that are as yet unknown. The famous quote by Henry Ford, founder of the Ford Motor Company, brings the point home: “If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses.” People will adapt easily to the improved services and customer experience that FinTechs will offer them and even to those services which customers did not know they wanted.
The traditional embossed structures, legacy systems, and ways of thinking of banks 
make it very difficult for them to solve the FinTech Equation (Innovation + Customer Experience + 24/7 = FinTech). However, it is absolutely essential for them to solve it to become a viable destination for millennials and the rest of us.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech239will change the future of today’s financial institutions, and many will not survive or 
will be integrated within large institutions. However, what is certain is that they will change our understanding of and expectations for financial services forever and create new markets. This is just the beginning, and it is unstoppable.
Banks must beware that the technology giants are coming and that some FinTechs 
will become much bigger and more powerful than most banks would like. Furthermore, the technology-heavy business model of FinTechs is closer to the heart of technology giants. That fact makes the likelihood of many FinTechs being acquired by the technology giants a realistic one, since they see them as a perfect entry ticket into the financial industry.
Financial institutions would be well advised to try to evaluate the business model of 
the best-in-class FinTech Supermarket as quickly as possible. It should be kept in mind that new competitors do not need to adapt to old business models. They only need to implement their new business models, without the structural hurdles of old corporate power structures. Furthermore, legacy systems will kill many banks since many top programmers do not want to build their cutting-edge developments on them or work for such institutions in the first place.
If in doubt, bank management should remember that new competitors can and will 
move and seize opportunities much faster than them. Moreover, FinTechs, which often lack the money that incumbents have, benefit from a great advantage: it leaves them with few options but to innovate. The likely outcome of the financial competition war will be the fusion of primarily best-in-class FinTechs, technology giants, and banks. Whoever wants to play a leading role in the future has to understand that technology and customer experience will determine the outcome. The proposed best-in-class FinTech Supermarket structure provides all parties with a win-win situation and, above all, a business model that can quickly adapt to customer needs and, not least, to the future. The king is dead, long live the king!Coming Soon to a Town  
Near You!
To most people, the growing strength of FinTechs and technology giants as 
competitors to traditional banking comes as no surprise. The real news is how quickly they are becoming successful in the financial industry. This financial sector trend cannot be undone. However, the disruptive innovation of FinTech services and technology giants provides better opportunities to satisfy the customer needs of today and, more importantly, tomorrow.
The human and advisory factor in banking will never disappear; indeed, it will gain 
in importance. FinTechs must factor this into their strategies regardless of their technological power in order not to lose sight of their ultimate goal of providing clients with the best possible experience and value. FinTechs are specialized and focused on adapting to the dreams and desires of customers; they are therefore more flexible and adaptable than big financial companies. In addition, their justification and future are always closely linked with the satisfaction of customer needs and wants.
Technology giants and FinTechs will play an important role not only in the retail 
banking space but also in the B2B segment. Corporations can benefit from the technology and user experience advances that will initially be conceived and developed for the retail client segment. At the end, there will be no difference in the ways people or corporations use technology. One has only to look at how the iPhone and Apple’s other technologies are used by both segments to see the huge potential.
The tremendous interest and investments of global venture capitalists in FinTech 
companies are reminiscent of the dot-com era. Although many dot-coms no longer exist, the survivors are here to stay and have changed our lives forever. FinTechs 240
The Fu Ture o F FinTech240Banks Partnering 
with FinTech Start-ups to Create an Integrated Customer Experience
By Bernard Lunn 
Founding Partner, Daily FinTech Advisers
People sometimes assume that “entrepreneur” means “young dude in a garage” 
(cue iconic image of suburban garage in Silicon Valley). That image is out of date because today’s entrepreneur could be a woman in Africa. It is also out of date because the entrepreneur could be working for a bank. (I use the term bank as short-hand for any financial institution which could be a bank, broker, or insurance company).
The venture capital (VC) funded start-up is only one framework for innovation.Indeed, one may consider how banks can create the future by partnering with 
start-ups. Partner implies a relationship of equals. Historically the idea of partnering made little sense. FinTech meant being a vendor, selling technology to the banks. For the last few years the banks might have felt the water heating up, but it was still comfortable. The boiling point transition has not yet happened in Financial Services. The impact today on the bottom line is small. The VC money pouring into FinTech is betting that it will not be small for long. VCs are so confident because they have seen the speed with which incumbents have been impacted by digitization in other markets (such as media, travel, and retail).
Banks should feel urgency.However that does not mean taking wild and ill-considered risks based on 
breathless media hype. The strategy has to be right. It is important to create win-win partnerships between banks and FinTech start-ups.Partnering, a Core Competency in 
the Digital Age, is all about Data
Banks cannot think clearly about this until they accept that almost all of the valuable 
data is outside their IT firewall – it is out on the open internet. This “programmable web” is a giant resource that FinTech start-ups use to win in terms of shorter time to market and lower cost value propositions.
To leverage this power, bank business leaders need to become familiar with a 
bit of technical jargon called an API.
1 API stands for Application Programming 
Interface; it simply means how to get resources (data and algorithms) from an external system and send resources back to that external system. Most of the resources that banks need do  not sit behind their IT firewall. Most of those 
resources are on the open internet and belong to the FinTech start-ups that banks need to partner with.
The good news is that this is a win-win partnership – as long as established players 
choose the right start-ups to partner with. Some start-ups do want to “eat your lunch”. They provide a service today to part of the banks’ market. They might not sell 
to banks’ customers  just yet  (because they are starting with a segment of the market 
that has been ignored by incumbents), but when they get to scale they  will be going 
after the bank’s core customers. The threat from some start-ups is very real.
Other FinTech start-ups want to partner with banks. These are the marketplaces, 
such as Lending Club and Angel List that win network effects by enticing other firms to add value to their data. They want banks to use their data. That is how they win the network effects game. Some banks may choose to ride the rapid value creation of these marketplaces by investing in them through accelerators and corporate VC funds – but investing is not the same as partnering. These transactional models fall within a bank’s organizational comfort zone and can be very profitable. If you invested early in say Lending Club or Angel List, you would have done well. However, that is very different from using resources from these network marketplaces to move the bank’s revenue/profit needle. A minority 
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech241investment does not confer proprietary advantage in digital businesses. If a network 
marketplace offers a proprietary advantage to somebody who owns some shares, they will not win the network effects game (and then your shares won’t be worth much). The APIs have to be open in order to win. Banks win by adding value on top of open data, not by controlling the data.
These win-win partnerships are all about data.
All the “hot spaces” that one reads about in the tech media are about data. Think 
of the Internet of Things (devices creating data), wearables (our clothes and fashion accessories creating data about what our body is doing that is transforming health care and insurance), or in-car devices and sensors creating data that is transforming transportation and insurance.
Think of network marketplaces in the wealth management market such as Lending 
Club and Angel List. These marketplaces create a lot of data – which they are happy to make available to partners who will add value to that data and by doing so add to the network effects for the marketplace.
Add Value at the Customer 
Experience Level
Data needs context and that means clever algorithms and user experience designs 
that delight customers and anticipate their needs. That is where banks can create value. Networked marketplaces are not new. For example, stock exchanges are networked marketplaces that spew out data feeds. To win the network effect game, these networked marketplaces have to empower an ecosystem, even if the players in that ecosystem (the service businesses that add value to the data) become more valuable than them. So, they are motivated to work with banks that will add value on top of their API.
Banks are service businesses – not marketplaces – and should not suffer from 
marketplace envy. Consider NYSE and NASDAQ. These are dominant marketplaces in massive markets, yet NYSE was acquired for $8.2 billion
2 and Charles Schwab 
(SCHW) is valued at over $40 billion. If you do not add value on top of these marketplace APIs, the FinTech start-ups that do want to eat your lunch will do so. This is a race and the prize goes to the swift.By using external APIs, banks can escape the legacy system rust and compete at start-up speed. Banks can then deploy a huge advantage when they launch using these APIs – a well-known brand.
Big Brand plus Start-up Agility is a 
Winning Combination
To seize that advantage, banks need to put themselves in their customers’ shoes 
and to address the pain-points that early adopters of these marketplaces have discovered. The early adopters of these marketplaces see the potential value, but they also see past the hype and understand that they do not offer any silver bullet. Banks that get this kind of feedback from focus groups can react in one of two ways:
•	“Phew, I am pleased that it is all over and we can ignore it.” This is like hearing 
that consumers were having problems buying stuff online around 1996.
•	This is clearly the future and these early adopters are giving us our “to do list”. This is the smart reaction and should drive the Customer Experience design.
The Great Rebundling
Networked marketplaces win by unbundling, by doing one thing well. To get network effects, the user friction has to be very low. It has to be “click here to transact”. Banks are service businesses that can survive and thrive through the FinTech storm by serving the complex needs of two types of customers through rebundling these atomized experiences into an integrated user experience for:
•	Wealthy people, and
•	Small and medium-sized businesses.
2 http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-12-20/intercontinentalexchange-said-in-merger-
talks-with-nyse-euronext.242
The Fu Ture o F FinTech242private equity. These emerging micro asset managers charge a fraction of the 
incumbent asset managers because their costs are far lower – they trade and the marketplaces do the rest (back office admin and access to investors). These micro asset managers are low cost and agile because they think about one thing and one thing only – profitable trades.
Wealth managers can win during the rebundling phase by creating simplified, 
delightful user experiences that enable risk diversification across asset classes, industries, and geographies and that can grab the low hanging fruit (alpha) that these micro asset managers are spotting. Gross revenue will decline during the unbundling phase due to digital competition. During the rebundling phase, net revenue will increase because the marketplace-enabled micro asset managers will charge less than the traditional fund managers and because the alpha from being early in these marketplaces will attract new assets. These network marketplaces also offer total transparency down to individual assets, enabling wealth managers to get one step ahead of regulatory drivers such as the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MIFID) II.
Rebundling in Small and Medium 
Enterprise (SME) Banking
The rebundling opportunity in small and medium business banking sits at 
the intersection of corporate financial software (accounts payable, accounts receivable, purchase to pay, e-invoicing, treasury management, supply chain management) and finance. As the corporate financial software moves to the Cloud, it creates an inter-company network for exchanging data. In other words, it becomes a marketplace that offers data that can be leveraged to provide financial services. This is already working in supply chain finance, but we are only at the very early stages of this transition, which will affect all forms of business lending.
Banks deserted small business lending because it was not as scalable as 
consumer lending or corporate lending. The exit of the banks enabled networked To serve those customers, banks need to first figure out where the trend is heading and then do something harder – forget about what customers are asking for today and figure out what they would be asking for if they knew it was possible. The disruptive technologies – mobile, blockchain, Internet of Things, wearables – enable so many new services that we really are only constrained by imagination and by real customer need; there are plenty of real customer needs, so the important factor is imagination and the will to act on it.
Rebundling in Wealth Management
Moore’s Law will remorselessly drive down price – eventually to free – of commodity services such as asset allocation. This is what robo advisers are doing today – asset allocation for 25 basis points.
Do not try to compete at this commodity layer with a high cost structure. The 
consolidation at this layer will be brutal and somebody like Vanguard with existing scale has the advantage.
There is plenty of room for innovation at the higher layers of data science, 
personalization, and reporting. This is the rebundling opportunity. Some robo advisers will try to avoid the consolidation phase by moving up the value stack into the world of wealth managers, focusing on the rebundling of complementary services. This is a race.
The key to the rebundling opportunity is a new breed of “micro asset managers” 
that are emerging as the early adopters of marketplaces such as Lending Club and Angel List. They are typically focused on one asset class. For example, micro asset managers are tapping into P2P lending marketplaces (such as Lending Club but also specialist ones for small businesses, auto loans, and education) and applying their knowledge and some algorithms to search for better risk-adjusted returns. In Angel List, these micro asset managers are angel investors who are becoming micro VC funds through syndicates that bring them what we used to call “limited partners”.
Lending Club and Angel List are already mature and are disrupting these 
markets. On Daily FINTECH
3 we also profile ventures at an earlier stage that are 
doing this across other asset classes such as public equity, public debt, FX, and 3 “Daily FINTECH” is the company the author has set up and where he provides daily updates 
on the global FinTech sector: http://dailyfintech.com/.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech243marketplaces to unbundle lending by offering low cost solutions. During the 
rebundling phase, banks have the opportunity to create integrated financing services using a mix of term loans, cash flow lending, and asset lending. The CFO of a small business does not have the time or expertise to use all these marketplaces directly. Like the wealthy investors, they need help with complexity. This is the rebundling service opportunity for banks.
The Rebundling Phase Has to be 
Driven from the Top
Finance has not faced this level of disruption before, so there are no role models 
during this wave of disruption. However tech companies have faced this level of disruption on regular occasions, so banks can get inspiration from:
•	Lou Gerstner’s turnaround of IBM after it was nearly wiped out by the PC wave of 
disruption.
•	Steve Jobs’ turnaround of Apple after it too was nearly wiped out by the PC wave of disruption.
•	Google’s early intervention by buying Android and how that saved Google from being disrupted by mobile.
•	Facebook’s late intervention by buying Instagram and WhatsApp to avoid being disrupted by mobile.Common threads in all these transformation programmes:
•	Customer Focus
The tech giants did not ask customers “what do you want?” via traditional focus 
groups. They figured out where the trend was heading (what new technology was coming) and created products that met real needs but which customers were not asking for because customers did not know what was technically possible.
•	Culture
Lou Gerstner summed it up in his classic book (Who Says Elephants Can’t 
Dance
4). Gerstner writes that he knew before he started that a big challenge 
would be changing the culture. At the end he writes that changing culture was not one of many challenges, it was the challenge.
•	CEO
Real transformational innovation cannot be delegated. This has to be driven from 
the top. All the above examples illustrate this.
In summary, banks need to partner with FinTech start-ups to create an integrated customer experience and should learn the lessons from those tech giants who have transformed their global organizations over the last 20 years threatened by the internet boom and managed to succeed by reinventing themselves.
4 Published in October 2009, https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Who_Says_Elephants_
Can_t_Dance.html?id=WyDMM6bz8SMC&source=kp_cover&hl=en.244
The Fu Ture o F FinTech244The Rise of BankTech – The 
Beauty of a Hybrid Model for Banks
By Frank Schwab  
Co-Founder, FinTech Forum; Former CEO, Fidor TecS AG
and Sophie Guibaud
Vice President European Expansion, Fidor Group
Today customers expect more innovative, faster, and efficient financial services 
in terms of money and speed. International transfer commissions of up to 8% and several days of waiting for one’s own money are not acceptable in a world of real-time communication.
However, traditional banks have failed to provide these services because of overly 
stringent regulatory requirements and inflexible, slow-to-adapt legacy core banking systems. On one side, repeated financial crises in the last century (several of them caused directly by the banking industry) have led governments to issue more stringent banking regulation. Banks have had to implement these internally, reorganizing all processes around them and thus leaving little time to focus on innovation.
On the other side, legacy core banking systems dating from the 1960s–70s are 
lacking the necessary agility to allow for the development of innovative services which customers have been longing for and are now coming to expect from any service provider. Banks have been trapped into coping with high operating costs, functional gaps, low agility of their systems, immature IT infrastructures, expensive IT projects due to redundancies, inconsistencies and unintended dependencies across product lines and access channels, as well as a variety of different technologies used.
While some institutions have been looking into rebuilding their core and middleware 
banking system from scratch, high costs and long lead times have prevented them from doing it so far. It has led banks to provide clients with what they are capable of and not with what customers wanted.
Today, consumers spend more and more time online and have gained the ability 
to compare and choose the financial services best suited to their needs in a few clicks. They want better, faster, and cheaper services. In this context, a new category of start-ups has emerged aiming to fulfil users’ needs in terms of financial services, not only by providing them with a more customer-centric experience but also by adopting new business models more suited to the customers’ lifestyle. For example, some international money transfer companies now charge a low flat fee to make a transfer worldwide, no matter how high the amount transferred while others have decided to charge a low variable fee depending on the amount.
A Viacom Media Survey from 2014
1 states that 53% of customers do not think their 
bank offers anything different from other banks, resulting in low switching rates 
from one bank to another. So far, consumers have mainly switched bank accounts driven by life changes such as starting university, getting married, or signing up for a mortgage. However, this might change in the near future with the arrival of new financial services and neo-banks with more innovative and differentiated offerings than traditional banks.
While governments are working on making it easier for consumers to switch bank 
accounts, banks should focus on providing their clients with the customer-centric services they are longing for and will ultimately seek at other banks. But which are the areas banks should focus on? Smooth onboarding, fast and seamless payments, 24/7 banking, mobile banking, sharing economy, alternative investment opportunities, or digital currencies are some options. The higher the perceived pain for the customer, the more successful the offer solving it.
The frictionless integration of financial services into the digital lifestyle of a 
customer’s life is the technical challenge a bank has to face in order to cope with future challenges. It is necessary that banks act and think as FinTech companies and not only as enablers of FinTech by adopting an open cultural approach.
FinTech start-ups have been challenging and reinventing all aspects of the banking 
sector over the past few years. Is banking under attack? Most banks think so. However, while the banking industry is preparing for the atomization of financial services, we, at Fidor, have been thinking a bit differently. We do not believe that in a world where customer-centric experience is key, clients should have to go from one app to another to use the financial services they need or spend several hours a month to reconcile their money flows from various apps and offerings.
1 http://www.millennialdisruptionindex.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/MDI_Final.pdf.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech245Over the past few years, we have been working on establishing a hybrid banking 
model, where we focus on what we do best and partner with FinTech companies for the rest with the goal of offering the best financial services to our clients from a single platform, irrespective of who the provider is.
We have also positioned ourselves as a FinTech enabler through an open API
2 
architecture, fidorOS, a new banking platform that seamlessly bridges traditional 
(accounts, deposits, transfers, loans etc.) and new banking services (peer-to-peer, crowdfunding, crypto-currencies etc.). Through this banking platform, we allow FinTech companies to develop their own financial services offering. While fidorOS performs the functions of a core banking system, it is actually built so that it runs on top of an existing legacy core banking system.
This effectively gives any user, be it a bank, a telecom, or a FinTech firm, the 
ability to launch new financial services quickly without the burden of maintaining and investing into highly expensive legacy systems in multiple countries. This hybrid model allows banks to fulfil two goals. First, it provides a better customer-centric experience to our clients and reaches out to new audiences, acting as an enabler for FinTech companies targeting these audiences. Since it is faster to implement than to change their legacy core banking systems, FinTech could be the opportunity for banks to serve their clients better through white-label solutions or referral agreements.
Imagine a one-stop banking marketplace where clients are able to use the best, 
fastest, and cheapest banking services, irrespective of the provider. Banks will keep on offering their best services and rely on FinTech for the rest. For example, Fidor’s platform offers three different layers of lending:
•	The first layer is comprised of a traditional overdraft provided by Fidor on which 
Fidor generates revenues through interest paid by customers.
•	The second layer is comprised of peer-to-peer loans where Fidor leverages its community allowing Fidor customers to borrow and lend money from and to other Fidor customers negotiating interest rates directly with them and paying a commission to Fidor for using the service.•	The third and last layer is the integration of other P2P lending platforms, such as SMAVA, the biggest German P2P lending platform, allowing Fidor customers to borrow larger sums of money from several SMAVA users at the same time. Fidor earns a commission for sending its clients to SMAVA.
The main idea behind this is to create and offer a number of options including proprietary and third-party offers (open architecture banking) instead of constraining a client to make a formal application for one bank product offering with no alternative to it. Fidor has been positioning itself as an aggregator of these financial services – rebundling the “unbundled financial services”.
In the meantime, banks could also conquer new customer segments, serving as 
the backbone to FinTech companies addressing markets underserved by banks (unbanked, kids, start-ups, digital natives etc.).
Let us illustrate this model with the example of the relationships between MVNOs 
(mobile virtual network operators) and traditional telecom companies. MVNOs are telecom operators using traditional telecommunications companies’ infrastructures to operate. They have emerged in the late 1990s for two reasons, depending on countries’ market environment. On one side, some governments wanted to increase competition in the telecom industry and forced telecom companies to open their infrastructure to them. In other countries, telecom companies themselves encouraged their arrival as they had spare wholesale minutes they wanted to sell. Telecom companies have lent their infrastructure to MVNOs at close to no additional costs for them. A large number of MVNOs have been focusing on niche market segments with specific needs like expat communities, SMEs, and/or low cost or prepaid model-oriented people.
If we apply this model to banking, banks would lend their core and middleware 
banking infrastructure and sometimes banking licence to FinTech companies for them to operate while indirectly reaching new audiences they have not been able to serve in the past. A very important point to raise is that while FinTech firms have been reinventing financial services towards a more customer-centric experience, some of the FinTech companies would not have been able to do so without the support of a bank. In particular we can think of money transfer companies and digital front-end banking offerings such as Simple or Moven in the US.
These FinTech companies have been successful in either addressing a particular 
pain-point experienced by clients around a given financial service or addressing 
2 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.246
The Fu Ture o F FinTech246A new era of a symbiotic bank–FinTech relationship is about to emerge, where banks 
will not only provide FinTech firms with their backbone infrastructure to operate but also rely on them to serve their clients better. According to JP Morgan’s CEO, Jamie Dimon: “We are going to work hard to make our services as seamless and competitive as theirs. And we are also completely comfortable with partnering where it makes sense.” It seems some banks have already realized the potential of this hybrid model.a specific target market or both. In particular, some of them have been targeting audiences that have been historically underserved by banks such as young people, the unbanked, SMEs or digital natives. Banks have been underserving them for a variety of reasons – these audiences were deemed too risky, not strategic, or banks simply did not know how to address them. Lending their infrastructure to FinTech companies is a good way for banks to reach out to these audiences indirectly.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech247FinTech Impact on Retail 
Banking – From a Universal Banking Model to Banking Verticalization
By Roberto Ferrari 
General Manager, CheBanca; Board Member, Mediobanca Innovation  Services
The digital disruption tide has arrived to hit the banking and financial services 
industry. This is not just a major technological change, or an addition of new channels, this is a profound overhaul of the whole retail banking model as the entire market structure will change. Pricing and revenues, customer experience, product and distribution models on which the universal banking model has been conceived in the last century are being challenged as never before. In 2015, the former Barclays’ CEO Antony Jenkins claimed that the “universal bank model is dead” and JPMorgan Chase’s CEO Jamie Dimon warned the financial community that “Silicon Valley is coming”… so what is happening?
The point is that traditional banks have not yet been capable of facing two major 
disruptive external forces simultaneously:
1.
 Change in regulation
2. Change in consumer habits (and technology).
Those two factors are intimately correlated, working together to make the picture 
even worse.
Firstly, since the financial crisis regulation on banking has become tougher. New 
capital and liquidity requirements have been imposed. Banking assets have been heavily scrutinized through stress tests. Many large banks have been fined for uncompetitive and unfair behaviour. This has had two major impacts:
•	Banks have been focusing on heavy regulatory issues rather than on facing new 
market challenges.•	Cost of compliance and regulation has flown high – Accenture’s FinTech Innovation Lab has estimated that most large banks have been spending 70 cents on the dollar on compliance and regulation.
Secondly, in the meantime, the exponential growth of the digital economy has changed consumer habits and technological platforms. The proliferation of digital channels is not only raising customer expectations, “spoiled” by Amazon, Apple, PayPal, and Google user experience standards, but has significantly changed the way customers see and use banking channels and products. This has further raised IT costs on one hand and is making the traditional core distribution channel – branches – oversized by a factor of 2:1.
The same regulatory and digital factors together are playing a significant role 
in squeezing retail banking revenues, on the basis of greater accessibility and transparency demand. As a net result there has been a significant structural increase in operating costs and a squeeze in profits. For instance the average administrative cost per employee of large European banks has risen by 68% in the ten years from 2003 to 2013, despite attempted cost reduction plans. Over 250,000 people have been laid off by the sector in Europe over the last seven years but it might not be enough.
The retail banking industry is still struggling to change its operating models and 
distribution footprint. Digital channels are built on top of inflexible, legacy IT frameworks resulting in increasing costs and complexity, and this ultimately creates additional legacy. Banks rely on old-fashioned IT systems and architecture with very complex product offerings. As a result it is estimated that IT represents 14% of banking costs, estimated at $461 billion in 2014, but at the same time 75% of this is just for maintenance.
Moreover, banks tend to keep a branch-focused approach, rather than moving 
full speed to a new digital omni-channel architecture. The top 25 global banks are spending on their branch network more than the top 25 global tech companies on R&D by a ratio of 2:1. Thus although banks have enough money to change their business model they do not go down this route. Scared of cannibalizing their own proprietary channels, of the complexity of their service and product portfolios, and significant organizational and IT challenges, they prefer to innovate in small steps instead of giant leaps.248
The Fu Ture o F FinTech248However, the truth is that the full service model is no longer a viable answer to 
market demands – more radical thinking and planning are needed. In order to cross the widening chasm in front of banks, small steps will not be sufficient.
FinTech: The Rise of New 
Generation Banking?
New digital competition has developed, under the label of “FinTech”. Digital 
competition and non-traditional new competitors are trying to exploit all this, starting to take away business opportunities from incumbent banks, targeting specific business lines, unbundling them, bypassing traditional players, and creating new marketplaces. It has been estimated that in 2014 the new FinTech sector has received investments of $12 billion (+300% vs. 2013).
1 In the US alone, 
FinTech investment jumped to $9.9 billion in 2014 and in 2015 it is continuing to grow. AngelList has listed 3,800 FinTech start-ups alone, trying to get business from traditional financial service players. While incumbent universal banks seem to retrench from global expansion plans (see recent announcements by HSBC, Barclays, and Deutsche Bank) digital newcomers can successfully challenge the status quo creating new streamlined business models focused on specific areas of banking. They can unbundle and break up the retail banking sector into different service and product segments.
For example, in Europe you do not need a bank to manage your transactions. You 
can open up a payment/e-money account with a prepaid/debit card with a Payment Institution
2 or with an Electronic Money Institute.3 In the US players like Simple or 
Moven offer mobile banking accounts without the need to have a banking charter. Moreover, “Shadow Banking” (defined as the financial intermediaries involved in facilitating the creation of credit across the global financial system, but whose members are not subject to regulatory oversight – the shadow banking system also refers to unregulated activities by regulated institutions) is growing, and is estimated to be worth $71tn. Pension funds and asset management companies are replacing traditional banks in corporate capital market financing. New, even hybrid, versions of funding and lending alternatives are blossoming almost everywhere. Universal banks, with stringent capital and RWA (risk weighted assets) regulatory requirements and high NPL (non-performing loan) stocks, are losing ground to new players in providing financing and capital.
The unbundling of the full service universal banking model is already happening. 
All retail banking components are at risk here. From payments and transactions to investing and trading, from lending to risk assessment, from small business banking services to funding and capital gathering. McKinsey estimated that a stunning 52% of retail banking revenues are at risk, being attacked by FinTech start-ups. The segments most at risk as identified by McKinsey are the macro-vertical sectors such as payment transactions (Transactional), Investing, and Financing.
Each of the verticals is a large cluster containing several sub-segments and in 
every single vertical segment there are FinTech challengers well positioned to take business from traditional, incumbent retail banks. Each segment has got its own challengers, from Lending Club to Kickstarter, from Wealthfront to Dwolla, from TransferWise to Kabbage. The Lending Club IPO made history at the end of 2014 representing the first of a new wave of FinTech “unicorns” ready to materialize.
In order to enter the market, these B2C vertical players successfully roll out new 
added value services. To do so, they may themselves collaborate with new FinTech B2B solution providers that can help provide a new digital fronting user experience (UX) and middleware/back end stack (i.e. providers of cross-platforms), that can be used by different B2C FinTech players. As a result, the whole retail banking value chain is being digitalized by new entrants. This is meant by the above Verticalization scheme.
Vertical Segment #1: Transactional 
Services
This cluster includes a large range of payment services and according to McKinsey 
can account for up to 15% of global retail banking revenues which are being attacked by FinTech firms. New players include banking/transactional service providers such as Moven to send-money and cross-border remittance services 1 Source: Accenture Study March 2015.
2 http://www.fca.org.uk/firms/firm-types/payment-services-institutions/.
3 http://www.fca.org.uk/firms/firm-types/emoney-institutions.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech249the $1 billion threshold led by Wealthfront and Betterment. This is a segment that 
is expected to explode as it has been estimated by AT Kearney that robo advisers will run $2 trillion assets under management by 2020,
4 boosted also by initiatives of 
large traditional players such as Charles Schwab with its launch of the “Intelligent Portfolios” platform, the launch of Vanguard’s online advice, Fidelity’s acquisition of E-Money and so on. Moreover, incumbents’ online trading platforms are being challenged by new digital players such as the online brokerage Robinhood in the US and eToro in Europe, among many others. New ways of cost-cutting/best performance and socially and community empowered trading solutions are emerging and will challenge big incumbents.
The overall objective here is accessibility of investment guidance to a broader 
audience. Getting an independent financial advisor is not easy (you need to have a minimum capital to invest) and it is costly, often represented by an annual 1% management fee based on your total assets. Online trading can be costly as well and has been built for heavy traders who often would be considered expert investors/traders. The new digital platforms promise democratization, significantly lowering asset management and trading costs and helping customers with easy-to-use solutions and social behavioural-based software tools.
The business at stake here is potentially huge. The evolution of social welfare 
policies and its impact on pensions and retirement will further boost market potential, opening up additional possibilities, as is happening in the UK with the recent pension scheme reform. There are two main questions:
•	Will this vertical be able to expand internationally, as asset management and 
investment advisory legislation may differ geographically?
•	Will digital-only platforms be replaced or challenged themselves by hybrid digital and human interfaces (such as Personal Capital in the US)?
This is a vertical where incumbent players seem to react faster, at least in the US, to the threat from FinTech start-ups and the whole market, especially consumers, could benefit tremendously from such a competitive battle. Also this vertical is triggering the growth of additional value-added software tools, from personal such as TransferWise, POS payment firms like i-Zettle to e-commerce digital payment platforms like Stripe, to name only a few. TransferWise, Square, Stripe, and i-Zettle all belong to the so-called “unicorns” with a valuation of at least $1 billion in May 2015 according to Finovate.
Transactional services have been one of the first segments to be unbundled. 
Looking at credit card schemes or at PayPal (probably the first FinTech company) one realizes that banks have already lost ground. New players are growing, for example Venmo, a payment app, transferred $1.3 billion in the 1st quarter of 2015. However, this is still small if compared to PayPal’s $230 billion transactions value during 2014.
Another component of the transactional business vertical is digital currencies such 
as bitcoin. It is clear that real-time cross-border payments are a key need brought about by the digitization of commerce and consumer habits that banks have not been able to satisfy well. The leading tech giants have focused on this segment to provide financial services without becoming a bank. Facebook has launched its own platform of P2P payments. We will witness in the next few years a process of “Whatsappization” of sending money and remittances frictionlessly, as simply as sending a text. In Europe the introduction of the Payment Services Directive 2 (PSD2) legislation and third-party payment providers will further open the market, letting non-banking players have access to customers’ bank accounts. Sofort, a German company acquired by Klarna, is already developing new services in this sector.
A stack of new value-added services is provided in combination with payments: 
account aggregators, portfolio management services (PMS) and budgeting software, and digital currencies exchange platforms, to name but a few. They can be targeted to improve the UX or to facilitate exchanges and will be further enhanced as the market opens up.
Vertical Segment #2: Investing
Robo-advisory (digital investment) platforms are becoming more visible. Wealthfront and Betterment are the most famous in the US, with about $4 billion of assets under management, and Nutmeg in the UK. In this cluster there are many players. None of them has reached the level of a “unicorn” but there are some already close to 
4 http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-06-18/robo-advisers-to-run-2-trillion-by-2020-if-
this-model-is-right.250
The Fu Ture o F FinTech250financial planning to tax optimization, from e-learning/gaming to big data analytics. 
Here as well the whole stack is being revolutionized by additional frictionless user experience-led interfaces and customer-driven analytics and engines.
Vertical Segment #3: Financing
The third macro-cluster is about financing and capital raising. Traditional incumbent banks are struggling to provide the needed capital and financing options to small businesses and consumers. Changed capital demands, risk measurement frameworks, and new regulatory requirements are making this much more difficult.
On the other side FinTech start-ups are successfully making their inroads, with 
the rise of crowdfunding, alternative finance, and marketplace-P2P lending platforms. This is the only segment where two start-ups have already gone public, with Lending Club and OnDeck in the US, and it already accounts for 10 “unicorns”. Alternative finance solutions are fast growing – in the US Lending Club’s new loans in 2014 reached $3 billion with a +265% growth rate vs. 2013. An E&Y and University of Cambridge report confirmed that this was about the same growth rate alternative finance players experienced in Europe between 2012 and 2014.
Although the original business model of a peer-to-peer (P2P) lending platform has 
been focused on the disintermediation of banks in order to offer higher returns to investors while offering more attractive interest rates to borrowers, financial institutions have reentered the P2P market. For instance, about 80% of Lending Club’s funding no longer comes from peers/consumers but from institutional investors and even venture capital in search for higher yield. So it looks more like an alternative lending to institutions than a person-to-person/peer-to-peer (P2P) business. At the same time crowdfunding platforms like Kickstarter and Indigogo are providing alternative capital to small businesses financed by individual investors. Moreover, we can see the rise of additional B2B hybrid platforms like restricted business angel syndicates such as OurCrowd or AngelList. This is likely to be the vertical with the highest form of disintermediation of traditional banking. We are also starting to see what is likely to be “FinTech 2.0”, i.e. the second phase of FinTech where banks and challenger start-ups work together to build a combined offer.This trend has started already, often referred to as co-optition, a necessary combination of competition and collaboration for the benefit of both partners. In the UK, for instance, Santander and RBS have signed a commercial alliance with Funding Circle, a P2P lending platform. Their small business clients in search of financing will be offered access to Funding Circle’s investor platform. Another example is the London-based InvestUp crowdfunding FinTech start-up, which is currently running pilots with two of the top six banks in the UK.
Vertical Segment #4: Cross-
software Platforms
The last horizontal stack of the proposed Verticalization scheme is composed of 
cross-software platforms that will be needed across segments. Know Your Customer (KYC) and identity management will be key in the future of banking to make sure that the frictionless design of on-boarding and user experience is backed by solid antifraud and ID authentication systems. API
5 middleware platforms will be key 
to efficiently open up, develop, and enrich online services. New core banking systems, often cloud-based, are being developed and these could open up new competitive scenarios such as FinTech firms applying for a banking licence or banks digitalizing their core business. Cross-border trade finance, payments tools, and networks need to be developed to enable the digitization of financial services. Big data and new analytics capabilities are needed to extract value and personalize the customer segmentation and service in all unbundled segments. This is creating an extraordinary development of new software capabilities across the board that will impact the whole financial sector.
Will FinTech Succeed? How 
Should Banks Respond?
Banks need to react. Some will respond appropriately – many established financial 
services players are already investing heavily into the FinTech sector – some will not and it will be too late. Will FinTech start-ups replace banks? Will all service offerings 
5 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech251be focused on verticals only, removing the need for universal banks? Nope – at 
least not in the next 15–20 years.
There is a reason why there is not yet a Facebook of banking or a fully global retail 
bank. Capital requirements are very tough and regulation is complex. This is not an excuse not to digitalize the business. Banks must become “FinTech banks” in 5–10 years if they want to survive, but turning a global financial business into a digital player is not easy. There will be a high level of M&A activity among traditional banks and a very strong natural selection among the FinTech start-ups as well, as in every post-Schumpeterian creative destruction phase. And there will be a lot of disintermediation, collaboration, and co-optition among banks, between banks and FinTech firms, and among FinTech businesses as well. As a result, there will be different business models co-existing in the marketplace. Banks should move from just incubating or financing start-ups to acquiring some of them, letting them lead and digitally transform the vertical segment they are focused on for the whole bank. Bear in mind that banks are in essence IT companies, handling money and data. Will they remember this?
At the same time banks have to choose what to give up in order to simplify 
operations and their product range. There is no other way – either you change and streamline or you die long term. Going down this path banks could simply outsource some of their product factories, optimizing their value chain and focusing more on integrated KYC checks, omni-channel delivery, and real personalized customer relationships and service offerings. As is happening in the P2P lending arena, banks can create their own marketplaces, collaborating with FinTech firms; they can connect investors with borrowers, connecting supply with demand. FinTech firms, on the other hand, will have to decide if they want to collaborate with banks or go it alone. They could focus on both a direct B2C but also an indirect B2B2C market entry strategy by offering a white-labelled solution of their service to the bank and its customer base. This has to be carefully managed in order not to distract the FinTech firm from its own consumers and its direct route to market strategy if desired. On the other hand if the FinTech firms want to reach real scale and experience, they might need some key partnerships with established players. Banks own clients. FinTech firms own new technology and the right mindset. Will they work together for a win-win outcome? Why not?
If they do so, we could see faster international expansions in the sector, with 
smarter FinTech companies cherry-picking their local banking partners. Banks and big tech giants may decide to expand internationally not via a universal bank model but by selecting the most efficient and streamlined vertical services. In summary, there is enough space for a large variety of business models and players. One thing is certain: financial services will change forever and for the better.252
The Fu Ture o F FinTech252Embracing the Connected  
API Economy
By Richard Peers  
Director, Financial Services Industry, Microsoft
and Shashi Rana
Enterprise and Strategy Architect, Microsoft
Previous chapters articulated the importance of connecting established financial 
services players and FinTech firms via Application Programming Interfaces, known as APIs. This chapter will provide details to fully understand the API economy. The connected economy is changing the way businesses innovate. Find out what it means for you and how to join the revolution.
The API Economy: Helping 
Financial Services Companies to Build Better Products
Markets and industries are changing faster than ever. Disruption takes many forms 
and businesses must grapple with the “innovator’s dilemma”: how to set the pace of change without stumbling over the legacy of the past. They need to embrace new technologies wisely to innovate fast at low cost and low risk. Application Program Interfaces (APIs) offer a powerful way to do this.
The Business Value of APIs
An increasing number of companies are using APIs externally to change how they interact with customers and their supply chain. Internally they are using APIs to change how the IT department works with the rest of the business. The key point is that an API platform can change the way IT delivers and the business innovates. But it does not require wholesale changes or five-year transformation programmes. Instead, take the first few easy steps on the journey using the API approach and continue in an agile, iterative way.The API economy is based around four building blocks: social, mobile, analytics, and cloud. Apps and services can be linked rapidly and cost-effectively to create an extended value proposition. For example, buyers and sellers could be connected via an exchange, where all parts of the value chain come from separate parties and are linked via APIs to facilitate an end-to-end transaction.
The Rise and Rise of APIs
There are already more than 11,000 public APIs and perhaps ten times as many private ones.
1 They make it possible for developers to share services and data 
easily and to build applications that link to other people’s services and data. This is creating new business models and new sources of value for companies. The Internet of Things (IoT), social media, changes in IT delivery, and the desire for multi-channel customer experiences will drive further growth in the API economy.
Everything is Connected to 
Everything Else
In order to participate in the new digital world, think about your business as one 
of many neurons that interact with each other in a wider value chain. You cannot expect to own the entirety of a consumer’s experience or to participate in all their digital interactions. So the API approach lets you focus on what you do best and connect with others to do the rest.
Getting Started
In the past, if companies spotted a niche or an inefficiency in the market they would need to build all of the technology to create a new product offering. However, using APIs enables them to take their pre-existing intellectual property 
1 http://www.slideshare.net/3scale/progress-in-the-api-economy-april-2014.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech253and link it to new services, saving time and money and allowing business to 
create new or extend existing value propositions. Although APIs have been available for many years, it is only the modern APIs that have been designed for today’s “plug and play” world.
Simply put, at a very basic level, by simply enabling business to do more rapid 
prototyping, with low cost and overhead, is a benefit in itself. Traditionally on-boarding developers, creative agencies, or even working with existing partners to do experiments was a long, costly affair leaving businesses frustrated with the lack of agility. Making small changes to the way you partner, design, execute, and orchestrate has big impacts on cost savings and agility. Embracing the API economy is not all about exposing your APIs externally. There are benefits for using the model internally and also clearly applying it with partners. Being ready for when the business model is right and mature enough for your business is part of the winning strategy.
An API platform helps you connect your business processes, services, content, 
and data to partners, internal teams, and independent developers in an easy and secure way.
In brief, we recommend:
•	Introducing the API model in small steps;
•	Rapid, agile prototyping, development, and testing using APIs;
•	Exploring new approaches to development;
•	Renting and using an off-the-shelf API management platform.
This approach maximizes flexibility and innovation while reducing risk and 
minimizing costs.
Understanding APIs
API stands for application programming interface. It is a way for developers to access services and resources from other pieces of software that they did not write. For example, it is common for web applications to have APIs that let other applications integrate with them. But it is more than mere middleware or just a service gateway.
A company releases its API specifications to the public or chosen third parties 
so that other developers can design products that work with it. It connects devices, processes, services, and software in a digital ecosystem (see the following Figure).
Figure:  APIs everywhere254
The Fu Ture o F FinTech254•	Developer gets paid. Some companies share revenue with developers. For 
example, The Guardian shares advertising revenue with developers and Walgreens’ QuickPrints API pays a percentage of revenue to app developers who use the company’s photo printing service via the API.
•	Content acquisition. The content acquisition model gathers valuable data for business use such as feedback, opinion, or content. For example, the Flickr API lets people upload images to the site.
•	Content syndication. This makes content available to be published by third parties such as the TripAdvisor API which lets travel websites share user reviews.
Drivers of the API Economy
Over the past 15 years, APIs have flourished everywhere but we do not think that is the end of the story. In fact, we are still in the early days of the API economy. Four things are going to drive its future growth: the IoT, social media, the need to deliver amazing, consistent experiences across multiple customer touch points, and the ambition of progressive IT departments to contribute more directly to the business growth.
•	Gartner projects that the total economic value-add from the IoT will be $1.9 trillion 
by 2020 across many – almost all – industries. Endpoints of the IoT will grow at a 35.2% CAGR from 2013 through 2020, reaching an installed base of 25.0 billion units. In 2020, 8.3 billion “things” will ship, with more than half of them consumer applications. The IoT will support total services spending of about $263 billion in 2020.
•	It is a huge opportunity (see the following Figure) and APIs are critical for getting the most out of internet-connected devices and tapping this market opportunity.
•	Social media. “Over the next eight years we may recognize that social media is not just another piece of technology that changes the world,” but, according to Social3, “a new era very similar to the industrial revolution. While the industrial revolution changed the way we produce (the first half of a business), the social revolution is changing the way we sell, market, service and deliver our solutions The Business Value of APIs for the 
Financial Services Industry
Open or public APIs are the tip of the iceberg; there are many more private APIs 
than public ones. Fuelled by mobile, cloud, social, big data, and the IoT, the number has grown enormously over the last decade.
APIs offer new ways to differentiate yourself and build a competitive advantage by, 
for example:
•	Integrating content from partners to create opportunities to cross-sell and upsell;
•	Creating new lines of business;
•	Extending product offerings by using corporate data in new ways;
•	Strengthening the brand by providing a consistent, personalized experience 
across multiple customer touch points;
•	Enabling reusability, so new partner integrations are faster;
•	Delivering services internally in a more efficient way. 
API Business Models
APIs can also make money directly or indirectly. There are various business models to choose from:
•	Free. Companies can open up their API to generate new revenue or share 
information widely. For example, Transport for London’s journey planner API or Amazon’s Product Advertising API which lets people advertise Amazon products on their own site.
•	The API is the product. Companies like Twilio and Stripe sell their services to other app developers exclusively, via an API: internet telephony and instant messaging as a service in the case of Twilio and internet payments for Stripe.
•	Developer pays. Some companies sell access to their information via an API, either on a pay-as-you-go model, with transaction fees, or with a monthly or annual fee.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech255(the second half of a business).” As this trend continues to grow, companies will 
use APIs to engage with social media, understand the opportunities, and explore ways to make money from it without damaging their brands.
•	Multi-channel customer experiences. Businesses are constantly seeking new ways to engage with customers. For example, retailers already embrace multi- or omni-channel strategies that integrate web, physical stores, and mobile. But with proliferating channels – including internet, mobile, kiosk, stores, branches, digital walls, in-car, games, TV, and more – companies need the agility to exploit new channels quickly and cost-effectively. Imagine being able to deliver a consistent customer and brand experience on a new channel in less than a month.
•	The proactive IT department. Consider an IT department that stays in the back room, only doing desktop and server stuff, constantly saying “no” and focusing purely on “keeping the lights on”. On the other hand, imagine an IT department that proactively gives business decision-makers new ways to attract, retain, and engage customers or improve business efficiency and agility or reach new customers, markets, and supply chain partners. Which department would you rather lead? If you were CEO, which one would you rather have in your business? APIs are an important tool for transforming IT departments.
How to Join the API Economy: 
Start Small, Start Now
Companies should embrace APIs in stages over time. If the process is well-
orchestrated, every step will create value, thus making the process self-sustaining, manageable, and cost-effective. You do not need a fully-developed strategy for social, apps, or channels. Nor do you need a completely new business model. Take an iterative approach to innovation by experimenting and learning with small, incremental projects. For example:Figure:  The graph was created from Gartner’s research as quoted aboveValue-add by using IoT in
commercial & public sectors
(adopter opportunity)$ 1 .6 T
Incr. revenue by IoT enabled
products & services
Conceptually, the total economic value-add across all sectors is a measure of GDP , so the values in this diagram represent incremental
global GDP . Value-add can be derived within an industry sector by either increasing sales, or decreasing input costs, or both. The value-
add represents the aggregate benefits that businesses derive through the sale and usage of IoT technology.By adding IoT capabilities to
products, suppliers can charge
higher prices for their products20 %
Supplier / service providers are
able to offer new associated
services80 %(supplier opportunity)$ 0.3 TWorldwide IoT
Value-add 2020
$ 1 .9 T256
The Fu Ture o F FinTech256•	Get creative apps and web front-ends built quickly and cheaply.
•	Rent and use the platform without fully integrating it.
•	Start by exposing a handful of functions for developers to use.
•	Leave stubs for future development.
•	Try “rent-before-buy-before-build” and “configure-before-customize” approaches.
•	Do not invest heavily in infrastructure and in-house resources for this prototyping 
and rapid development stage.
Do not start with a pre-conceived set of rules or limit your creativity worrying about security, risk, or other constraints. Instead brainstorm all the possibilities and then pick a few low-risk, quick-win possibilities to start with.
Existing Middleware is not the 
Answer
Most middleware systems do not have the necessary functions to deliver a true API. 
For example, they often lack a process to on-board developers, an app store, key management, and monitoring tools to report on consumer behaviour and usage. Dedicated API platforms are designed to get developers up and running quickly, making it easy to:
•	Expose data services through well-crafted APIs which are robust and easy to 
scale;
•	Register and on-board developers;
•	Submit, review, and approve apps;
•	Provide accessibility while protecting the business from threats, back-end overload, and service issues;
•	Monitor how people are using the APIs with detailed reporting;
•	Get insight into customer behaviours;
•	Add features such as news feeds, geo-location, search engine integration;
•	Investigate errors and performance problems to improve responsiveness.
The big question is whether you want to rent, build, buy, configure, or customize. The platform which allows you to rent and configure is by far the cheapest and our recommended approach to leverage the API economy in financial services.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech257Banking Like Water
By Frank Sonder 
CEO & Co-Founder, foresee
Let us move from the technical aspects of application interfaces (APIs)1 to the 
customer. Customers are at the centre of the FinTech revolution, so what do 
they expect from financial services in the future? In his famous New York Times 
interview2 David Bowie described the future of the music industry as “music 
like water”. Thirteen years later we listen to songs on Spotify or Apple Music and gain mobile access to an almost infinite music library. As a result, we are witnessing diminishing intellectual property, the extinction of copyrights on a large scale, and an almost entirely new business model for the music industry. Similar scenarios apply to movies, transportation, and overall to the way we consume media.
Banking is next. Digitalization and intelligent algorithms put the financial 
services industry under extensive pressure. Their products and services are not even original or unique and today are largely the same wherever you bank. Financial services will transform in the same way as music towards becoming completely digital and ubiquitous. In addition, clients are losing trust, new competition is arising, and the regulatory pressure is stronger than ever before. A business model that was supposed to be safe is continuously eroding. What if banking becomes a simple infrastructure component too? What about new currencies that are not backed by governments and political unions but by communities? Might it be bitcoin or paying with mobile phone minutes as in Kenya?
Nowadays almost all business models, products, and banking services are 
challenged by FinTech start-ups or peer-to-peer networks. We increasingly pay via mobile and digital, finance our ventures via crowdfunding, and increasingly invest based on algorithms and cognitive computing.
It is time to rethink banking radically – if we need it at all.The futurist Gerd Leonhard suggests asking a very generic question: “Is my 
business dispensable?” For the banking business the answer is as simple as the question: Hell, yeah! If we have a look at the general business functions in banks, this becomes even more evident. There is a lending business, a deposit business, an investment business, and services such as money transfer, providing cash, and a banking infrastructure in general. And today each of these business activities is threatened fundamentally by FinTech start-ups, tech corporations, or peer-to-peer networks.
The single most important reason for this is the digitalization of our entire society 
that increasingly removes intermediaries from business transactions.
The Middleman Problem
Peer-to-peer network solutions have already made many business models for intermediaries across multiple industries obsolete, connecting buyer and seller directly and cutting out the middleman. Airbnb is connecting hosts with guests, myTaxi and Uber find drivers for passengers, “prosumers” (a person who consumes and produces content, derived from “prosumption”, a dot-com era business term meaning “production by consumers”) and customers meet on many different online platforms. Banking is a classic intermediary intending to reduce market uncertainty and information asymmetry in an imperfect market. But what if digitalization provides the foundation for a nearly perfect market in which buyers and sellers can conduct frictionless transactions – a market that does not need intermediaries like banks?
The End of Money
It is money that most clearly symbolizes our personal relationship with banks. One of our first lessons in economics is that there was a barter economy before the invention of currencies. Until then trading goods and services for goods or services was limited to a small community and direct relationships. As trade increased money filled the emerging gap and made it possible to exchange services for money and money for services. But the power of money exceeded that simple mechanism and became what empowered capitalism and particularly the finance capitalism of today. Money became the language of global “turbo-capitalism” and 
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected Economy” for further detail about APIs.
2 http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/09/arts/david-bowie-21st-century-entrepreneur.html.258
The Fu Ture o F FinTech258developed far beyond a market economy, linked to products and services – it can 
be just about investment.
But there might soon be a world without money as we know it. As money is such 
an integral part of our everyday life, that might be hard to imagine. We have to face it: we are already in that phase. There are more unredeemed air miles around than US dollars,
3 making it the biggest currency worldwide. Approximately 30% of the 
Starbucks revenue in coffee shops is made up of Starbucks Stars, their internal reward system. In Africa, Vodafone supported the development of an infrastructure where people pay with airtime, be it at the hairdresser or the newsstand. Using your Nike running gear in Mexico lets you earn credit points and use them to buy additional equipment. All this is a currency by definition but without calling it money. And so far we have not even mentioned digital crypto-currencies like bitcoin, a decentralized system not backed by governments or the financial industry but by a technological system.
The End of Capitalism?
We should stay within the economic context for now and have a closer look at what fundamentally underlies our economic system. Jeremy Rifkin
4 predicts that 
capitalism will be replaced or at least widely accompanied by a sharing economy by 2050. This new system might look more like Neolithic society rather than a new form of the capitalism that has only existed over the last 150 years or so. In the future, this time span might even be considered a relatively short episode compared to the existence of the human race.
Robots Take Over
Let us go ahead and tear down a few more banking business areas. Crowd lending and micro credits have been with us for quite some time, and this questions the lending business of every bank. Crowdfunding seems to be the peer-to-peer approach to modern investment business. Taking artificial intelligence (AI) into account we might already have found the successor to today’s portfolio management and investment banking: IBM Watson, the Jeopardy-winning supercomputer (which might be a misleading name after all) is already able to process a range of tasks formerly accomplished by humans. Intelligent algorithms are already able to predict the strategic intent of corporations based on every single piece of information they can find and understand. While a portfolio manager might be able to follow a certain number of companies closely to propose future investments, a cognitive computer system can far exceed that in terms of number and pace. Trust and credibility, clearly human domains, could be the last remaining advantages for a human advisor over a cognitive computer. Trust in financial institutions, however, was fundamentally damaged during the recent financial crisis.
No Apple Bank Around
A survey shows that digital strategy became the number one topic for banks in 2015, climbing three places from 2014. Although this seems to be an obvious priority, it is hard to imagine that the impact of digitalization has only been recognized now with such enormous and fundamental challenges ahead. There is serious competition from large tech corporations. For them, financial services are just another brick in the wall they build around their far-reaching ecosystem. However, it is not recommended to wait for the first appearance of a Google or an Apple Bank considering the vast amount of payment transactions and credit cards on file. They are already banks and there is no need for them to enter the banking business officially. It is much smarter to keep out of it due to the extensive regulations they would face.
The Digital Natives Challenge
The so-called digital natives are another challenge. Surely banks are addressing this upcoming target audience and acknowledge the fact that they have to take their needs and lifestyle into account. However nobody is embracing the full impact of this change. Digital natives need to become the core of every future banking business model. Instead, institutions raise the question of how to get customers back into the branch. While branches are still considered their most valuable asset, the question is completely off topic for digital natives. Most of them have never had 
3 http://www.theguardian.com/money/2005/jan/08/business.theairlineindustry.
4 Rifkin is the bestselling author of 20 books on the impact of scientific and technological 
changes on the economy, the workforce, society, and the environment.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech259obtaining economic capital and successfully marketing education as our cultural 
capital. Economic capital is essential to acquire and, in particular, to trade. Social capital has been very limited so far but with the rise of social networks that changes rapidly. As technology evolves, every individual becomes better able to exchange the different forms of capital. Would that not be an exciting new business field for future banking?
In that context, David Birch makes an interesting point in his book Identity is the New 
Money .
6 Money, he states, is only a simple form of memory. He refers to the stone 
currency of an island in the Pacific Ocean. As the stones were too heavy to move, it 
was enough just to remember which stone belonged to whom. He states that today there are more elaborate forms of memory which might make money obsolete.
•	Security as unique selling point
Another interesting business area for banks might be security. If there is one 
experience even digital natives have with a bank, then this is it. Everybody knows the lockbox with top secret documents in it. Or the heavy steel doors of the bank safe that gets robbed in almost every James Bond movie. If data is the currency of the 21st century why is my bank not taking care of that? Why are banks not helping consumers to monetize their own data and capital instead of Facebook, Google, and Co.? When banks pilot their new future branches, they entirely forget that there might also be a security experience valued by their customers.
What is Wrong with Water?
Finally, providing infrastructural services is not the worst option of all. If banking like water is a reality, we need somebody to deliver this service securely in time and place. And if future currencies become as sophisticated and promising as it seems today, we are even more in need of a competent supplier for these trendsetting identity services.a relationship with a bank or an experience related to retail banking. Another wrong question is the one about customers’ expectations, not only, but especially, those of digital natives. Instead, banks should face the fact that their potential clients have no expectations at all, just as they do not expect a lot more than a regular and silent service from their water or power supplier.
Banking as a Service
For European banks, a silent revolution is scheduled for 2016 – silent but incredibly powerful. European legislation has already forced the public railway and telecommunication monopolies to open up their infrastructure to competition. Following the inconspicuously named Payment Services Directive
5 banks need to 
offer an API (application programming interface) for third parties to show revenue and account balances but most of all to initiate a money transfer. The term usually used for this is “banking as a service”.
Confronted with these and other challenges and with a realistic analysis of the 
status quo we ask the final question: is there a chance at all for established financial players to defend themselves successfully against an eroding business model and the extremely powerful competition? It might sound cynical that the only reason to believe in the success of traditional financial institutions is the pure fact of their existence. In quantity, not quality.
To end on a positive note let us consider two prospective outlooks for banks of the 
future:
•	Capital exchange
The first relates to social capital. Philosopher Pierre Bourdieu defined three 
different forms of capital a person might acquire and trade: economic, cultural, and social capital. Today the core of our individual activities is focused on 
5 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32007L0064&from=EN.6 David Birch, Identity is the New Money (London Publishing Partnership, 2014).260
The Fu Ture o F FinTech260Eliminating Friction in 
Customers’ Financial Lives
By Travers Clarke-Walker 
Chief Marketing Officer, Fiserv
Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey, released in 1968, famously and 
accurately predicted a future with gadgets like video phones and tablet computers. A less discussed prediction in the film was the emergence of a universal currency of “credits” – gone were dollars, yen, and pounds.
Then there is Douglas Adams’ Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy published in 1979, 
which heralded the Babel Fish – affording its user the ability to understand all languages.
There is often unnecessary complication for the casual user in multiple versions of the 
same thing, be it currency or language. Once those complications are solved – as they were in these science fiction examples – the particular innovation becomes a seamless and expected part of life. Anything less would be viewed as a nuisance at best.
With almost unlimited processing power and data storage in the hands of over 
half the world’s population, unnecessary, restrictive, and cumbersome differences can be overcome. That is why the rise of the “best single version” of a product or service is now happening: Facebook for personal connections, LinkedIn for business connections, Spotify for music, aggregator services to demystify choice, and so on. The rise of single proposition offerings around peer-to-peer (P2P) lending and investment, international remittances, and payments is precisely because it can be done better once and well than it can be done by thousands of institutions that are part of a seemingly ancient matrix of companies and offerings.
What these successful new companies have figured out, and what mainstream 
financial institutions continue to wrestle with, is that the balance of power has shifted from the company to the customer. This is more than a placating mantra that proclaims “the customer is always right”. The best FinTech disrupters understand the information customers have access to and the ways customers influence each other. In a world where customers (and employees) publicly discuss their experiences, companies can no longer inflate claims about the quality of their offering. At least not in a way that anyone trusts.This contributes to a growing sense that the new vanguard of single proposition financial services offerings will replace traditional banking. In fact, one study found that nearly half of millennials in the United States expect tech start-ups to disrupt traditional banking operations and nearly three-quarters would be more excited about financial services offerings from big tech companies (Google, Amazon, and so forth) than they would from their bank.
1
This tells us that customers’ expectations are changing. They expect simplicity, ease, and seamlessness. They expect transparency and reliability. Some company, somewhere, will deliver it. Some company, somewhere, will deliver financial services when and where the customer demands it.
This is not a signal that all hope is lost for the banks. Financial institutions have 
delivered innovations that drastically improve the customer experience and address major pain-points. Mobile banking has addressed a serious point of friction that online banking created – the need to be at your computer to log on. This point could easily be belaboured with statistics, but it is easier to observe what the Royal Bank of Scotland already has: that their “busiest branch” is the 7:01 train from Reading to Paddington. This is the norm.
Mobile banking is a step in the right direction. Its rate of adoption and the value of 
transactions being moved are projected to double in the UK by 2020.
2 Globally, 
mobile banking is transforming low-income people’s access to financial services (though in many cases mobile operators have been the disrupters). Mobile banking demonstrates what is possible when financial institutions deliver products and services that place the customer’s experience at the centre.
Catching Up to the Future
There is exactly one constant when it comes to technological innovation: if you do not do it, someone else will. Those looking to be at the forefront will need to rethink traditional models and approach innovation like a start-up.
1 http://www.millennialdisruptionindex.com/.
2 http://newsroom.fiserv.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=907511.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech261Change the Prism: Solve the 
Friction First
The quantity of possible innovations and their seemingly constant rate of change 
make it difficult to know where to go next. Traditionally, financial institutions have started from a place of cost savings and risk mitigation, both areas of friction for the bank, but not necessarily for the customer. The solution with the best cost-benefit ratio is the solution that is taken on. Realizing those benefits, however, depends entirely on the rate of customer adoption.
And that is the thing of it. Customer adoption is in no way impacted by whether or 
how the bank benefits.
Every start-up entrepreneur knows the pitch deck starts with a slide outlining the 
problem being solved. This is often referred to as the pain-point or friction. The deck does not outline the start-up’s problem or the investor’s problem. It seeks to address the customer’s problem.
There are arguably few places consumers experience more friction than in 
managing their financial lives. Financial institutions that thrive in the future will focus first on the customer’s experience. This is what the competition is doing and what all of the single proposition offerings have figured out.
If we look through the lens of the customer’s needs, wants, and frustrations, 
it becomes much easier to prioritize product and service development. What frustrates the customer most? What keeps him or her from using a particular product? The latter point may be as much a matter of marketing and education as it is of product development. For example, more than half of people who are not using mobile banking in the US say it is because of security concerns.
3 The irony is that 
mobile banking is roundly considered more secure than online banking, so it seems awareness and trust-building may be an antidote to friction in that case.
Financial services companies that are able to adapt to the changing pace of 
consumer demand will start with a synopsis of what they are solving, and then maintain laser-sharp focus until the customer’s friction has been removed. The result will be a product or service that meets the needs of the customer in an entirely new way. And with it, increased adoption, satisfaction, retention, and cost savings.
Rethink Product/Service 
Development Cycles
Going back to the temple-based money lenders of ancient Greece, banking’s 
traditional branch model remained largely unchanged for thousands of years. Business model innovations typically amounted to little more than changes to fee structures or incentives. Even through modern times, the rate of change has not been characterized by a sense of urgency.
In theory, everyone knows times have changed, but this is not always expressed in 
practice. In fact, in 2014 McKinsey reported that banks in Europe had digitized only 20–40% of their processes, and allocated less than 1% of total spending to digital.
4 
Financial institutions have a difficult time making major technology investments only to dispose of them a few years later. For banks to compete, this mind-set must change. The speed with which technology and information evolve compels financial services providers to implement systems that allow for agile decision-making and more rapid deployment. Metrics should aim to be near-term and technology should be in a constant state of beta testing.
This is what the history of banking has taught us: do not build another complex, 
difficult-to-upgrade system. FinTech is changing fast and it will continue to do so.
Let Someone Else Build It
Financial services tech providers are already developing cutting-edge products and services. This is what they do best, creating everything from products that ease the process of loan underwriting to biometric solutions that take advantage of things like mobile fingerprint readers and – maybe soon – brain wave detectors that allow a person to access his account simply by thinking his password. These partners can bring in the accelerators and innovators banks would not typically know about. 
4 http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_technology/the_rise_of_the_digital_bank.3 Fiserv 2014 Consumer Trends Survey.262
The Fu Ture o F FinTech262Financial institutions have access to extraordinary amounts of unused processing 
power that can be unleashed to improve the customer’s experience. For example, if geolocation services place a mobile banking customer in a car dealership, alerts can immediately be sent to extend a loan offer. This allows the customer to know which offer (the bank’s or the dealer’s) is more competitive without having to do the research. Mobile banking apps can even incorporate features, such as car model and make searches or used vehicle book values. These are services that deliver value to the customer at exactly the moment they need it.
In physics, friction is the enemy of speed; in financial services technology, activity 
or transactional friction are the end users’ nemeses. Financial institutions
   and 
technology providers    around the world would do well to recognize that the future 
will be owned by those who make the complexity of life as simple as one currency and one language. This is what the consumer wants and needs. It is where business and services will have to go. It really is that simple.
The future of FinTech is already here. It is enabling financial services that move at 
the speed of life. The only question now: who will be participating in it?They know how to layer on existing technology (and they also know when not to).
What financial institutions uniquely have to offer is a cultivated selection of offerings 
that are relevant to the communities in which they operate. These institutions have the potential to offer a level of education, support, and service that single product providers will have difficulty replicating. This is a significant competitive advantage and it is where financial institutions are smart to focus, all the while leveraging tech providers’ IP and resources.
Anticipate When the Customer Will 
Need You, and be There
From the customer’s perspective, financial services is not a sector or a business 
relationship. Financial services are a part of life, something people experience and interact with all day, every day. The opportunity for financial institutions is to participate in the customer’s experience. This is about being in the right place at the right time, every time.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech263FinTech is the Future Itself
By David Gyori 
CEO, Banking Reports
Humanity is looking forward to a uniquely exciting period in the long history of 
financial services. One that is turbulent, but unusually transformative. One that is full of unexpected ideas, creative disruptors, loud successes, and threatening failures. So buckle up, my reader, and come along with me for this beautiful, but bumpy ride and keep your eyes open because you will see things that are revolutionary in the 4,000-year history of financial services.
Let’s begin our journey into 2030! Take a seat next to me in this self-driving car!
1st Stop: The Survivors
Do you see these skyscrapers? This is the traditional financial district. Some 
companies have survived and some have not, but the basic traditional institutional forms had to remain with us from the past.
Banks remained because institutions taking household deposits on a large scale 
have to be heavily regulated, monitored, overseen, and controlled by financial authorities.
Insurers and re-insurers survived because taking on risk collectively and sharing costs 
of a negative event within a community creates a structural form that is inevitable.
Asset managers are still here because it makes sense that specialized 
professionals create and meticulously manage sizeable units of investments.
2nd Stop: The Cashless Beggar
You wanted to stop here. That guy with the old iPhone 10 in front of him on the street is a beggar. Why does he have the iPhone there? Well, he receives money through the “iBeg-app”. You see, people passing by on the street just swing their smart-watch in front of that old iPhone 10 and punch a button. That button is the sum they want to pay. We are in a de facto cashless society. Some states have banned cash but it is hard for some old people get rid of the nostalgia of carrying a physical wallet.
For those few still using cash, old ATMs have been substituted by cash-drones 
and human ATMs. You can order cash from your bank and a drone delivers it to you. Peer-to-peer ATMs (aka human ATMs) are apps on your phone. You punch in how much cash you need and choose a person nearby offering that cash for a tiny commission. Money flows from your account through an escrow to the other person’s account. Just like in an Uber-app you see the profile and the rating of the other person.
3rd Stop: The Self-Pay Store
Let’s pop into this supermarket and buy some things. I have opened the self-pay application on my smartphone. You can see it very well: there is no cashier. That is past. People check in the items through their phone and pay by pushing a button. This way we buy more because we don’t have to stand in line and we monitor real-time how much we are spending in our basket. So seamless! I have heard this story of my parents standing in line. I mean what a strange thing: you want to buy stuff and in return the shop makes you stand in line? Absurd. Shoplifters? Each basket of goods has a distinct total weight. Shoplifting is way down.
4th Stop: The Metropolitan 
Museum of Plastic Cards
The Metropolitan has the largest collection of plastic cards. This is so much fun! 
People used to have wallets with stuff like their driver’s licence and these strange plastic credit cards in them. I can understand why people carried a driver’s licence: imagine that cars don’t drive themselves but people have to drive them! It is understandable that a licence was needed for that. But these plastics must have been totally ridiculous. Did you know that people had to swipe these through machines and often punch in numbers, and those little machines even printed a paper slip? Totally crazy! Banks issued these cards. They often paid artists to design the colors, patterns, and pictures on these small plastic cards. At some stage people used plastic cards and mobile wallets in parallel. They punched in the data from their card into their smartphone and so they used the phone to pay but they still used their plastic, too.264
The Fu Ture o F FinTech264I am glad that you like the exhibition! There is now a really nice temporary 
gallery of cheques. Cheques were these written orders of payment. You are right, they did not make any sense to begin with. But it was actually quite hard to get rid of them. In the transition period people used smartphone cheque-deposit apps. They took pictures of the front and the back sides of this paper slip with their smartphone camera, sent the picture to their bank via an app, and their bank deposited the sum from the cheque onto their account. Can you imagine that?
Cruising in Office Mode
In “Office Mode” your phone’s screen is appearing on these built-in laptops. This is what we call phoneputer. Your phone provides the software and the hardware and you link it to a laptop screen and keyboard so you physically work on a laptop, but it is all happening hardware- and software-wise on your smartphone. So while the car takes us to the other part of the city we will work a little bit.
We will report a data loss incident to our cloud-insurer. The insurer operates a 
robo call-centre. There is no complicated call-centre menu system. The artificial intelligence driven robot picks the phone up immediately. It conducts emotional recognition and senses that we are angry. A biometric fraud-protection system analyses our voice along 140 vectors and concludes that we are telling the truth, this is not a fraudulent claim.
Charity donations also have become so much easier. We will use a direct and 
immediate charity site. You push a button and your money immediately arrives at a random, pre-screened person’s phone in a developing country.
We will visit our bank’s virtual branch. Since our society eliminated cash and 
cheques the relevance of a branch is decreasing. A very thorough ID check can be conducted remotely, so accounts can be opened up and operated digitally in a client-not-present way. There are several kinds of virtual branches:
•	A totally virtual branch that we can access via internet – advisors are AI propelled.
•	A totally virtual branch, where advisors are avatars backed by humans. This is 
also called a drone branch.•	A virtual branch, surrounding real advisors, projected online by video.
•	A video advisor with either one- or two-way video access.
•	Augmented branch: a real branch that we can access via internet and get loads of digital info besides being able to video-chat to advisors.
Since I am a client at GAFA Bank I can choose which type of virtual branch to use. GAFA Bank was established by Google, Apple, Facebook, and Amazon in 2020. After the famous PayPal IPO in 2015, when eBay spun off the payment company these four giants teamed up to form something new that challenged incumbent banks. GAFA Bank’s philosophy is to enable FinTech companies to sell their products through them. So they are serving as an “aggregator” for FinTechs. They aggregate the most suitable solutions for your financial need and help you choose the best alternative, which is usually a FinTech company’s offer. It proved to be such a powerful strategy that traditional incumbent banks also tried it but they were less successful. This is why GAFA Bank is now the largest bank in terms of total assets globally.
We will also purchase some food for you online. We will pay with a 100% asset-
backed, distributed-ledger-type digital currency called Inter-Coin. Well, you are coming from 2016 so you already know about bitcoin. Inter-Coin people have learned the necessary lessons from the story of bitcoin. They have kept the good things and made up for the missing ones. Inter-Coin obviously works in distributed-ledger logic. It is backed by Gold, Silver, Platinum, and Palladium (10%), USD (35%), EUR (10%), JPY (5%), GBP (5%), CHF (5%), and RMB (30%). You can transact with Inter-Coins globally almost real-time for free. People love it all around the globe and large economies back it happily since it creates demand for their currencies, unlike bitcoin which posed competition to them.
5th Stop: The Password Memorial
People used passwords for decades. They struggled with combinations of numbers and letters. Biometric identification alternatives have taken over. Fingerprints, retinas, irises, blinking, voice and facial recognition, hand movements, heartbeat-analysis, and typing speeds are among the exciting and innovative solutions we use nowadays. Biometrics provide more user convenience, reduction of fraud, greater consumer satisfaction, and more cost efficiency. This memorial monument 
The Fu Ture o F FinTech265has been erected in remembrance of the password, that strange phenomenon that 
so many people and machines spent their scarce resources on.
6th Stop: The Global Financial 
Regulatory Council Headquarters
In the first two decades of the 21st century globalization was already dominant, 
but financial services regulators were operating at national levels. Regulation itself posed a great barrier to internationalization for FinTech companies. The regulatory patchwork was complicated and impossible to fully comply with. GFRC, the Global Financial Regulatory Council, was established in 2025 and it has been doing incredible work ever since.
7th Stop: The FinTech City
This 30-storey building is home to thousands of FinTech start-ups and FinTech investors. Each floor is occupied by different FinTech companies: data analytics, personal finance, wealth management, mobile wallets, P2P payments, remittance services, challenger banks, neo-banks, API
1 providers, treasury solutions, 
insurance-tech, crypto-currencies, crowdfunding, P2P lending, invoice trading and cash-flow services, user interface (UI), user experience (UX) and customer experience (CX) specialists, biometrics and identification, wearables, information security, alternative risk management and scoring, artificial intelligence (AI) and robo advisors, emotional banking experts, funds, investment bankers, venture capitalists, angel investors, accelerators, incubators, labs, and co-working spaces. This is a huge building. In 2014, there were approximately 5,000 FinTech companies and 25,000 full licence banks globally. By 2016, the number of banks remained unchanged but the number of FinTech companies grew to 25,000, so it quintupled in two years. By 2030 the number of banks fell to 12,000 and the number of FinTechs grew to 50,000. FinTechs are smaller than banks, but all together they represent a huge force.
But wait a minute! I just looked at my smartwatch and now I see, my dear reader, 
that it is time for you to depart. Please swipe your watch here and take this shuttle! Have a safe journey back! Back to the past, back to 2016. I hope to see you again in the future, in the future of FinTech, in the future of “The Future”.
1 See the chapter entitled “Embracing the Connected API Economy” for further details.266
The Fu Ture o F FinTech266A Future Without Money
By Chris Gledhill 
CEO & Co-Founder, Secco Bank
Most sci-fi films have one element in common: they are set in some utopian future 
where they do not need money. There is no poverty, no greed, and no war. Instead the pursuit of happiness and self-betterment is the order of the day. Sounds awesome, right? It is probably too good to be true but assuming it is, in part, correct and sometime in the near future money becomes redundant, how do we get there? This section explores a roadmap from 21st-century money-obsessed cultures to a future without money.
They say to predict the future one must look to the past and there is certainly a 
rich history in financial services and the concept of money. It is true there have been significant changes in how money operates over the millennia but the really exciting developments have been in the last century with the advent of modern computing. There is one niggling problem though – the innovations in the field of money have been largely about convenience of form rather than the concept itself, e.g. the movement from coins to paper was great because it solved a weight problem. What we are lacking is a fundamental re-invention of the concept of money.
Take banking for example – when the internet came along banks looked at 
their paper forms and processes and translated them into websites. Then when smartphones emerged they squashed the same pages into smaller screens. What we have ended up with is a digital version of centuries-old constructs – few have asked whether, given today’s digital technology, we would have designed financial services in the same way. The same is true for money – some of the problems money was invented to solve some 3,000 years ago have gone away, others have changed. In fact, most of the core requirements for money have gone yet we still use money. So what is the alternative? Here we look at three emerging challenger economic models and associated technologies with real potential to become the next evolutionary phase of money.Challenger Economic Model #1: 
Power is Money
The energy utility market is facing disruption in the form of battery technology. 
When the balance tips towards it being cheaper to store than generate electricity we will see localized power management. Leaders in this space are companies like Tesla with their line of in-home battery products. These would allow households to disconnect from electricity suppliers, generate, and store their own electricity. Why stop there though? What if a household can generate more power than it uses – how does it sell that power back to households/industry with more power-hungry requirements – enter the Energy Economy (EE).
For an EE to work we need all homes wired into some sort of national grid (already 
present in most developed nations!) and we need individuals to replace their wallets with batteries (we already carry batteries in our pockets, wrapped up in a smartphone!). How might this work in practice? There is something interesting happening in the West African nation of Ghana. In Ghana it is not unusual to have power blackouts for 2–3 days at a time. This poses a problem for businesses reliant on mobile phone communications. Enter the Power Bank Phone, a phone popular in Ghana that is unremarkable except for a giant 10,000mAh (measure commonly used to describe the energy charge that a battery will hold) concealed within and a USB port for charging other devices. The owners of a Power Bank Phone can offer to charge other people’s phones and devices in exchange for products and services – essentially turning kilowatt-hours into a currency! A comparison can be drawn with schemes like M-Pesa in Sub-Saharan Africa where phone credits are used as currency, however in an EE the currency is also a commodity. An EE would be an economic sink model where energy is generated then consumed, with our need to consume forever exceeding our ability to generate, the delta being the inherent “value”. What makes this even more exciting are developments in 3D printing and so-called “replicator” technologies, named after a fictional device in Star Trek that can turn energy into matter to create tangible items. Einstein’s famous equation
E = MC
2
The Fu Ture o F FinTech267states that energy (E) in a system (an atom, a person, the universe) is equal to its 
total mass (M) multiplied by the square of the speed of light (C, equal to 186,000 miles per second). When used in the context of an energy economy we have a currency that is also a commodity that can take the form of a consumable giving us a potential financial equation of …
£ = MC
2
Unlike bitcoin, a crypto-graphic proof of wasted energy or carbon trading, the 
byproduct of generating energy, an EE uses the energy itself as the currency.
Challenger Economic Model #2: 
Hyper Frugality
What happens if we mess with the supply/demand balance, if we create a massive 
abundance of supply that far exceeds our demand as consumers. The logical outcome would be that the “cost” of consumables continues to drop to near negligible levels – basically everything becomes free making money redundant. The same outcome would present itself if our demand for goods and services dropped to the point where we became so frugal that we had negligible consumption, again negating the need for money – this is Hyper Frugality.
To get to this state at least one of two things need to happen.We automate our work (increase supply) – a trend we have witnessed since the 
industrial revolution and one that continues to accelerate is the automation of work. This has driven down the cost of extracting raw materials, the manufacturing and the distribution of goods. Coupled with robotics and artificial intelligence (AI) we might get to a state whereby the entire supply underpinning our existence becomes automated and self-maintaining to the point where all material demands are provided for. Whilst the vision is a way off, the practice is being trialled via experiments in Universal Basic Income (UBI). UBI gives citizens a basic salary they can live comfortably by, without requiring work in return. For participants the concept of money loses its weight to the point that it has negligible importance in their mind-set providing they live within reasonable means.
We change our existence model (decrease demand) – another way to disrupt 
supply/demand is to change our way of living to reduce our demand on resources or become part of a self-sustaining ecosystem. This model can be witnessed today in remote Amazonian tribes that form part of their ecosystem and live within the means of their habitat. Some abstract models of existence have been proposed, particularly out of the transhumanist movement. Through transhumanism we could have the ability to change our plane of existence and essentially our species to a place where money becomes irrelevant. For example, with the advent of virtual reality (VR) technologies we would spend an increasing amount of time in VR rather than real worlds. In VR worlds our consumption model needs not to be dependent on physical supply and so the economic model swings towards that of negligible demand, thus money becomes redundant. Taking transhumanism to the extreme we might be able to evolve as a species beyond biological into a digital existence where central processing unit (CPU) petaflops (defined as the measure of a computer’s processing speed and which can be expressed as a thousand trillion floating point operations per second) might become our commodity of choice. Either way, it is difficult to see how money in its current form would survive such a journey.
Challenger Economic Model #3: 
Reputational Currency
The third challenger economic model is reputation. The reputation of an individual, 
rather than her bank balance, is more akin to how we naturally measure someone’s value outside of economics. Consider people like Mahatma Gandhi and Anjezë Gonxhe Bojaxhiu (aka Mother Teresa) who famously did not have monetary wealth but their reputational wealth was immense. On the contrary, some that we have despised most throughout history have been the richest or the most obsessed with the accumulation of monetary wealth. So if reputation is a more efficient currency mechanism how do we use reputation to gain access to products and services – the answer is that we kind of already are!
Banks and other financial services have always looked towards data points beyond 
someone’s basic bank balance when assessing their credibility, or more importantly creditability! Companies like credit reference agencies do exactly that – they look at an individual’s history of managing credit and boil it down to a credit reputational score. Outside of banking we see reputational scoring taking off with the Sharing Economy and other trust-based business models. Things like eBay buyer/seller ratings and Uber driver/passenger or AirBnB guest/host ratings are exactly that. All these scores are accumulated within silos and become effective ways to assess 268
The Fu Ture o F FinTech268members by their respective communities. What we are now seeing is a cross-
pollination of reputational scoring between silos and industries, e.g. someone’s social media records can now be used to assess credit worthiness.
Followed through to its natural aggregated conclusion we would end up with one 
centralized reputational score that is an amalgamation of all walks of life. It would be your education, credit reference, social media, employment history, transactional records, connections, memberships etc. all rolled into a single score. This would be an extremely rounded way of assessing someone’s trust and integrity but how do we convert this into a currency capable of dethroning money in its cold hard numeric form? Introducing reputational currencies.
Reputation Currency (RC) is akin to giving everyone his or her own individual share 
price and shares. With RC we would each have our own currency, the value of which is pegged to our reputation. In this RC world you would not go to a bank for a loan, you could “quantitative ease” your own currency – basically print your own cash. This would be logically the same as getting a loan as there would be more of your currency in circulation, thus devaluing your currency over a period of time – just like paying back a bank loan. An RC system opens up exciting concepts such as investing in other people’s futures. You could, for example, purchase reputational currency in an undergraduate thus funding their tuition, and gain from the uplift in their reputation that comes with earning a degree. Collectively you might invest in say an Oxbridge 100 index (top 100 Oxford and Cambridge graduates) rather than a FTSE 100 index in the hope that the individual’s reputation will continue to increase. Perhaps where this can benefit society most though is the charity sector. Consider someone who is homeless on the streets. Their reputational score would be very low, akin to penny stocks. You could invest in their currency then pick them up, give them training, put them in a suit, get them a job, and ultimately watch their reputational score explode and reap the benefits in owning part of their reputational stock. It would mean for the first time in human history that it becomes lucrative to help rather than exploit people.
With a reputational currency system we start to see retailers price things in an 
individual’s currency and wrap into it things like loyalty, discounts, rewards, and offers to the point that we all get custom pricing. The concept of an item’s value or worth would no longer be universal as pricing is now a very personal thing, just as reputational currencies become an inward-looking currency system. In an RC system, concepts such as relative rich and poor cease to become relevant to us and so ultimately money itself becomes irrelevant – it is like the last iteration of money before we no longer need it.
The three challenger economic models above are not exhaustive but a 
representative sample of what might be in store this century, triggered by the FinTech revolution. For the most part these challenger models have cultural challenges rather than technical ones. Not all would welcome the end of money, not least those that have accumulated an awful lot of the stuff! But with all the exponential technological changes it would be naive to believe our view of money will be the same as our children’s or grandchildren’s view.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech269Ethics in FinTech?
By Huy Nguyen Trieu 
Managing Director, Citi; Author, Disruptive Finance
With no ethics, Finance 2.0 is doomed to repeat the mistakes of traditional finance. 
But there is an easy solution.
Finance is a strange industry. One day, it is Dr Jekyll, the other it is Mr. Hyde. On 
the bright side, finance plays an important social role, from helping consumers buy a house to supporting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in borrowing money. On the dark side, we all know those horror stories about predatory lenders and products that were mis-sold to bank clients.
Why is that? It is because finance is at the heart of society and the economy – try 
to find a dynamic economy without a strong financial sector – and therefore yields an enormous leverage. Any decisions in finance can therefore have significant impact – whether positive or negative. For example, it would be very difficult for a young graduate joining a consulting company to lose $1 million in one day – except perhaps by burning the building … The same graduate on a trading floor could lose that amount in 10 seconds. So leverage is very high – and therefore cutting corners can be a higher temptation for employees.
This brings me to ethics and values. It goes without saying that all industries and all 
companies need ethics and values. However, a local merchant without ethics might have less disastrous consequences for society than say a bank, or an insurance company – again, it is all about leverage. If you read this book, you might agree that some of today’s start-ups will become tomorrow’s financial giants – the next Googles in finance if you will. And in the same way as traditional finance can have a positive or negative impact on society, Finance 2.0 will face the same challenge – and potentially much more. Because not only could Finance 2.0 benefit from the same leverage as traditional finance, it might be much more impactful because of the use of technology.
First, is there any obvious reason why a FinTech start-up, once it becomes a 
$100bn company, would behave differently from today’s financial conglomerates? I do not think so. I do not think that people working in a financial institution are fundamentally different – i.e. less ethical – than those working in other industries. But the higher leverage and the potential for quick gains make it much easier to succumb to temptation – if there are no proper barriers in place. Which means that today’s FinTech start-ups could be exposed in the future to the same issues that banks and insurance companies have faced (e.g. mis-selling, price fixing, etc.) but also potentially other problems due to the augmented use of technology, for example:
•	A better exploitation of data is already revolutionizing core pillars of finance, 
like lending. And there is definitely a rationale for lenders to better assess the credit risk of borrowers. It seems logical that your profession or your studies could have an impact on your ability to pay a loan. But with the billions of pieces of data that a lender could process, what if they found that having rich friends also impacted your credit score? Or if your employer announced a redundancy plan in your division, should your credit score based on big data suddenly plummet?
•	Pushing the thought process further, are we certain that the more data we have, the better it will be for consumers? Let’s take the example of insurance – which in essence is a mutualization of risk. Insurance works because we cannot be certain about various outcomes such as a car being stolen or health issues. But with the increasing amount of data coming from big data or wearables, we are witnessing an individualization of risks. At the moment, this translates into positive incentives (“go to the gym, get a discount”), so no one is worse off. But of course, the end game is a total individualization of each risk, and then what happens if you are overweight and never go to the gym? Would we be moving to a society where the best risks (which are usually also the most privileged part of society) would get the better conditions, and the worst ones would be significantly worst off?
These two examples show that the increasing use of technology, big data, and artificial intelligence will lead to a huge social impact from Finance 2.0. FinTech start-ups should therefore pay special attention to ethics and values; however it is not the case today. By looking at the homepages of 16 leading FinTech start-ups, what do we notice? Half of them have an “About us” category, a third have a “Help” section, many have a “News” or “What we do” link. But none of these 16 companies has a section called “Our values” or “Ethics”. Obviously, we could argue that 270
The Fu Ture o F FinTech270real estate on a homepage is very precious, and that “values” or “ethics” is not a 
differentiating factor for a start-up, and does not merit any place there.1
But then, this does not feel right either. Many FinTech start-ups are marketing themselves as a better, cheaper, but also more ethical alternative to traditional finance – in other words, as a choice for consumers who felt abused by the ethical lapses of banks or insurers. If this is so important, why are their values not on the front page? My feeling – from being involved with FinTech start-ups and bankers alike – is that most of this message is marketing more than anything else. And I am clearly not implying that FinTech start-ups are immoral, but rather that they are amoral.
In other words, it is not that FinTech start-ups have bad values or bad ethics, it is 
more that they have no values or ethics. And I do not mean it as a criticism, but as a fact – having been an entrepreneur myself. When you launch a start-up, thinking of values or ethics is usually not your first priority. Your first priorities are finding an idea, developing a product, hiring a team, raising money, finding clients, making sure you have enough money to pay your team, etc. The reality is that there is enough stress and pressure so that you rarely have the time to think of other things like ethics or values. To summarize, today’s situation is not satisfactory:
•	Finance 2.0 will need very strong values and ethics because of its impact on 
society.
•	FinTech start-ups market themselves as being different from traditional finance – which suffered from lack of ethics – but do not really regard ethics as a priority either.
•	This is because ethics and values do not have an immediate benefit for the survival and development of start-ups.
How do we solve that conundrum? One of the obvious answers is through regulation, which I think can be helpful but is not the answer. Regulation usually comes after something bad has happened, and is not an adequate solution. For example, the banks have been subject to an intense amount of regulation since the 2008 crisis, but even in 2014 – six years later – there were still examples of clear ethical breaches by individuals that resulted in multi-billion fines. So if regulation is not sufficient to prevent individuals from acting unethically, what is? The answer in my opinion is to encourage ethical behaviour through values that have been ingrained in the culture of the start-up. For FinTech start-ups to build a culture that includes ethics and values there are three important requirements:
•	Realize that values and ethics have a social and economic impact: for 
entrepreneurs who want to create very successful companies, understand that having strong values will not only have an impact on society, but also their own business.
•	Understand that culture is developed from inception: start-up founders need to be aware that whatever values or ethics they have at the beginning of the start-up will have a huge impact down the line.
•	Demand the scrutiny of stakeholders: get ethics and values on the agenda of venture capital, employees, clients, and journalists.
As I mentioned, most entrepreneurs do not focus on ethics, because ethics will not help them with the immediate survival of their start-ups. However, most entrepreneurs do want to change the world, and have big visions, and would therefore be very receptive to those ideas. Awareness will therefore already be a very big first step. If entrepreneurs understand that the culture of their future billion-dollar company is being built by all the small decisions that they take on a day-to-day basis, then that would be a very big step forward indeed. If in addition to asking their team “how will this new feature make money?” they also ask “should we be doing this?” then these are the roots of a strong culture that will permeate the whole organization. Will most entrepreneurs be willing to do that? I believe so. They just need to be aware.
I think that FinTech CEOs will also be very receptive to including ethics in their 
start-ups as they realize that a strong culture will not only impact society, but also the success of those start-ups. Just think of how many bank CEOs would today prefer to focus on their business, rather than spend their time changing the culture of their organizations? Or take the very telling example of Wonga, one of the first FinTech start-ups that was on its way to becoming a tremendous success story. 
1 Transferwise, eToro, Nutmeg, Ondeck, Osper, CurrencyCloud, Wealthfront, Calastone, Credit 
Benchmark, CrowdCube, Funding Circle, Gocardless, Invoiceable, Lending Club, Square, 
and Stripe. List chosen as the top 16 of 130 FinTech start-ups, http://www.disruptivefinance.co.uk/?p=354.
The Fu Ture o F FinTech271Wonga was launched in 2007 and used sophisticated credit scoring models to lend 
money to consumers, while achieving a very low default rate. Wonga was expected to be worth more than £10bn in 2015, but instead they were heavily fined by the UK regulator because “in an investigation begun by the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) and taken forward by the FCA, Wonga was found to have sent letters to customers in arrears from non-existent law firms, threatening legal action”. Also, “330,000 customers who are currently in excess of 30 days in arrears, will have the balance of their loan written off and will owe Wonga nothing”.
2
Instead of becoming the next Google in finance, Wonga’s future is now much more uncertain, and is subject to very heavy regulatory scrutiny. For a FinTech CEO, we are not talking about theoretical problems that could happen in 20 years’ time; it is a very concrete example for a start-up pre-IPO. Of course, the reality of an entrepreneur is that it is a very hard journey, and anything not essential will be relegated to second priority. And it would be unfair only to put the onus on entrepreneurs, when society as a whole should care. The various stakeholders of a start-up should therefore also put ethics and values at the top of their priority list. For example:
•	Investors and venture capitalists should demand that their start-ups 
communicate their values and should not tolerate unethical behaviour.•	Employees should know what the values of the founders are before they make the leap of faith and join a start-up.
•	Clients should question the values of the start-up.
•	Journalists should not focus solely on business models and valuations of start-ups, but also question their impacts on society.
Having myself been an entrepreneur, I am of course very wary of well-intentioned people who give general advice that is un-implementable. So here is a piece of actionable advice for FinTech entrepreneurs, start-up founders, and tech CEOs, who believe that their start-ups will change the world, and will have an impact on society, but also very selfishly want to make it a huge success.
On your homepage, next to the “About us”, “Products”, and “FAQ”, why don’t you 
add a link to a page called “Our values” and tell the world what you believe in? Spending time with your team to write this page will force start-up CEOs to reflect on what is important to them, what impact they can have on society, and say it to the world. This will in turn help them hire people who will share the same values, get money from investors who understand their principles, and build the right culture for a sound multi-billion-dollar company in the future of FinTech.

Additional Praise for The Hedge Fund Book
“Those new to the hedge fund industry will beneﬁt immensely from the
chapter devoted to answering frequently asked question about hedge funds
as well as the easy-to-understand explanations of all major areas of hedge
funds throughout the book. Experienced hedge fund professionals readingthis book will also gain valuable insight from other managers and service
providers on current issues facing hedge funds. Whether you are looking
to raise more capital, improve your fund’s operations and due diligence,launch a new hedge fund, or just learn more about hedge funds, this book
is a must-read.”
—Theo O’Brien , Associate, Private Equity Investment Group
“Richard’s new book is a terriﬁc testament to the knowledge that he and
his team have of the hedge fund industry. From novice to expert hedgers, I
recommend this training manual. Its information makes for a sharp, timely
evaluation of where hedge funds are and where they are likely to be heading.”
—Thomas J. Powell , CEO, ELP Capital Advisers, Inc; Author, Standing in
the Rain: Understanding, Surviving and Thriving in the Worst Financial
Storm since the Great Depression .
“Richard Wilson is the best single source for practical answers on the hedge
fund industry. For people new to the industry or considering launching their
own fund, look no further. You’ll ﬁnd it all here.”
—Richard Zahm , Portfolio Manager, Second Angel Fund I
“This book caters to hedge fund aspirants as well as ﬁnance professionals.
Richard does a wonderful job of demystifying any misconceptions that the
hedge fund industry faces today. Through a combination of interviews with
industry professionals, a top down approach to both the basic and morecomplex nuances of running a hedge fund and colorful examples of the
industry, Richard has been able to achieve what so many other hedge fund
books aspire to. To capture the reader in both an enjoyable and informativebook that will soon become a standard in the ﬁnance education industry.”
—Curtis Birchall , Longbow Capital, Inc.
“The Hedge Fund Book provides an “inside baseball” look at the hedge
fund industry and should be required reading for someone looking to getinto the business.”
—Scott Freund , Senior Family Wealth Advisor, GCC Family
Wealth Management“I wish this book had been around when we got started. This piece acceler-
ates the ramping up period for hedge fund management company foundersand executives. Most people think that to have a hedge fund all you need is
a good trader and a Bloomberg terminal. They are shocked when they learn
what it really takes to be successful. This book does a phenomenal job of
explaining and exploring these keys to success.”
—Pratik Sharma , Hedge Fund Manager
“The Hedge Fund Book is one of the few books that speciﬁcally address
the “business” of hedge funds. Make no mistake, running a hedge fund
is a business just like any brick and mortar store that requires attention
to operations, sales and marketing, compliance, etc. as well as investmentreturns. Now more then ever, institutional investors are placing an emphasis
on back/middle ofﬁce functions. The Hedge Fund Book offers practical
insight and advice from seasoned professionals on these overlooked aspectsof a hedge fund business.”
—Nakul Nayyar , U.S. Long/Short Hedge Fund Trader
“The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for Professional and Capital
Raising Executives by Richard Wilson is an excellent guide for established
and developing hedge fund managers, and can be used as a point of reference
in the administration of best practices of hedge funds and investor relations.”
—Valerie Emanuel , President, Valerie Emanuel & AssociatesThe Hedge
Fund Book
A Training Manual
for Professionals and
Capital-Raising Executives
RICHARD C. WILSON
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Copyright C/circlecopyrt2010 by Richard C. Wilson. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web
at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any impliedwarranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with aprofessional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside
the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Wilson, Richard C.
The hedge fund book : a training manual for professionals and capital-raising executives /
Richard Wilson.
p. cm. – (Wiley ﬁnance series)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-52063-5 (cloth)
1. Hedge funds. I. Title.
HG4530.W546 2010
332.64
/prime524–dc22
2010003434
Printed in the United States of America.
1 0987654321This book is dedicated to my wife, Adriana Wilson, for being
a wonderful person and a constant balancing force in my life.
Despite my passion for business and marketing, the Brazilian
in her makes sure that on some level I work
to live and not live to work.Contents
Preface xi
My Story xii
Disclosure of Financial Interests xiii
Acknowledgments xv
Introduction 1
CHAPTER 1
Hedge Fund Fundamentals 5
Hedge Fund Mechanics and Statistics 6
History of Hedge Funds 8Media Portrayal of Hedge Funds 9
Hedge Fund Ecosystem 10
Future of the Hedge Fund Industry 13Chapter Summary 13
Review Questions 14
CHAPTER 2
Institutionalization and Operations 17
Stephen Abrahams, Vice President of Marketing for a
London-Based Hedge Fund 18
Bob Pardo, CEO and President, Pardo Capital Limited 19
Vinod Paul, Managing Director of Service and Business
Development, Eze Castle Integration 21
Nakul Nayyar, Quantitative Trading/Support, Quad Capital 24
Hendrik Klein, CEO, Da Vinci Invest Ltd. 26
Sheri Kanesaka, Associate, Michelman & Robinson, LLP 29
Eric Warshal, CEO, Fund Associates 30Lance Baraker and William Katts, Senior Managing
Directors, TradeStation Prime 32
Chapter Summary 36Review Questions 36
viiviii CONTENTS
CHAPTER 3
Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 39
Bad News 40
Public Relations Management 41
Educational Marketing 42Forget about Contacting More Investors 43
E-Mail Marketing Best Practices 45
Copy Writing 49Case Proﬁle 50
Stephen Abrahams, Vice President of Marketing for a
London-Based Hedge Fund 54
Pratik Sharma, Managing Director, Atyant Capital 55
Hendrik Klein, CEO, Da Vinci Invest Ltd. 59
Chapter Summary 60Review Questions 61
CHAPTER 4
The Shooting Star 63
18 Lessons from Shooting Star Hedge Funds 63
Rick Nummi, Partner and General Counsel,
Accounting and Compliance International (ACI) 65
Thomas Powell, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer, ELP Capital 72
Chapter Summary 74
Review Questions 74
CHAPTER 5
Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 77
Top Five Tips for Starting a Hedge Fund 78
Hedge Fund Pitch Book Creation 80
Syed Ali, CEO, Saturn Partners, LLC 81
Nakul Nayyar, Quantitative Trading/Support, Quad Capital 86Chapter Summary 89
Review Questions 90
CHAPTER 6
Dedicated to Due Diligence 93
Scott Freund, President, GCC Family Wealth Management 94
Brian Reich, President and Founder, Atrato Advisors LLC 95
Richard Wilson, Hedge Fund Group, CHP
Designation, HedgeFundBlogger.com 98
Due Diligence Effects on Hedge Funds 102Contents ix
Chapter Summary 105
Review Questions 106
CHAPTER 7
Giant Hedge Funds 109
Best Practices from $1 Billion-Plus Hedge Funds 109
Richard Zahm, Portfolio Manager, Second Angel Fund 111
Scott Cohen, President and CEO, Hedge Solutions 117Chapter Summary 119
Review Questions 120
CHAPTER 8
Governance Best Practices 123
Andrew Main, Managing Partner, Stratton Street
Capital LLP 124
David R. Koenig, CEO of the Governance Fund, LLC 130
Chapter Summary 134Review Questions 134
CHAPTER 9
Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 137
Hedge Funds 101 137
Hedge Fund Operations 139Hedge Fund Marketing and Sales 142
Hedge Fund Careers 156
APPENDIX A
Bonuses of $1,779 169
APPENDIX B
Example Due Diligence Questions 171
Questionnaire 171
APPENDIX C
Top Hedge Fund Web Sites 177
Glossary 179
About the Author 185
Index 187
Contact the Author 191Preface
This book was created as a training manual for professionals who work
in the hedge fund industry or who would like to work more closely with
hedge funds as clients or business partners. Over the past seven years I have
read most of the hedge fund books that are available. There are great books
on hedge fund investment strategies, the history of hedge funds, ﬁnancial
modeling, and risk management. I never could ﬁnd a book, though, that
provided unﬁltered advice, insights, and hard lessons learned from hedge
fund managers. This gap in the marketplace and the growing needs of our
Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional (CHP) Designation program is what ledto this book being created.
Within this book, I hope that every reader will learn:
/squaresolidHow hedge fund managers of any hedge fund may increase their oper-ational effectiveness immediately.
/squaresolidWhy most hedge fund managers struggle to raise capital, and how being
proactive within the right areas can allow a small team to raise a large
amount of capital.
/squaresolidHow to implement governance best practices that will improve investor
conﬁdence, enhance decision-making processes, and decrease the risk of
some types of fraud.
/squaresolidHow to emulate the best practices of $1 billion-plus giant hedge funds
that have learned many lessons the hard way.
/squaresolidWhy what you read about hedge funds in the general media is off-base80 percent of the time.
/squaresolidHow to double the effectiveness of your capital-raising efforts by focus-
ing on your unique process and positioning more than on your numbers.
/squaresolidHow small to medium-size hedge funds in the real world are improving
their business structure and processes without spending millions on
infrastructure.
The intended audience for this book includes CHP Designation par-
ticipants, hedge fund managers, professors, traders, third-party marketers,
students, service providers, investors, and consultants. The book provides
xixii PREFACE
a fundamental understanding of how hedge funds operate at a high level,
while also taking the reader down to very granular, real-world steps thathedge fund managers can take to improve how they manage risk, operate,
select service providers, govern their own organization, and raise capital.
This text should help readers shortcut the process of interviewing 30 hedge
fund managers and veterans, by providing their advice, tips, strategies, and
painful lessons learned here within one concise book. If you add up all
the time of the managers and consultants who were involved within theseinterviews, the book contains over $80,500 worth of advice yet costs less
than $75.
In addition to the chapters of the book that focus on niche subjects
such as institutionalization, capital raising, governance, or best practices of
$1 billion-plus hedge funds, this book contains multimedia resources that
should help the reader comprehend and absorb the advice provided herein.
We have created over 50 video and audio resources, which you will see
referenced through this book. These may be used to supplement universitycourse lectures or sent to team members who may also want to learn more
about hedge funds and how they operate. To access these resources, please
visit HedgeFundTraining.com.
MY STORY
To provide some background as to why this book was written, here’s a shortexplanation of how I entered the hedge fund industry. My ﬁrst experience inworking with hedge funds was in 2001 when I completed an internship for
a currency/commodity-based hedge fund in Europe. I helped them complete
leading-indicator trading research on the currencies and commodities ofJapan, New Zealand, and Australia and analyzed the relationships between
them.
After completing this work, I started learning more about marketing
and sales and found myself drawn more to ﬁnding out how to raise capital
and connect with investors. This led me to independently negotiate and signcontracts to raise capital for a boutique investment bank in New York and
one of the early fund of hedge funds groups based out of South Africa.
I helped them raise capital by identifying potential institutional investors,completing market research, and reaching out to investors.
After working within this area while also consulting within the area of
risk management for three years, I took a position with a third-party market-ing ﬁrm. This ﬁrm raised capital for three to ﬁve fund clients at a time, and
I was in charge of completing the hands-on marketing of three clients: an
$80 billion long-only portfolio optimization ﬁrm, a $30 million U.S. hedgePreface xiii
fund manager, and an $800 million global macro hedge fund manager. This
unique set of clients and my responsibilities of researching new potential in-vestors, building organic investor databases, e-mailing investors, completing
educational marketing, calling investors, working conferences, and creating
marketing materials taught me a lot about how things should and should
not be done. In this role I raised a depressing $0 the ﬁrst 11 months, and
then started raising $100,000 a week. Eventually, after 18 months, raising
a minimum of $1 million to $3 million a week.
While marketing these funds, I found that due to the fragmented struc-
ture of the industry, most fund marketers simply follow their competitors’
strategies. In addition, most have few resources to leverage, focus little onpositioning, complete no capital-raising training, and ignore the power of
writing strong copy and using educational approaches to marketing to in-
vestors. At the same time, my online networking association, the Hedge
Fund Group, grew to over 30,000 members and my blog, HedgeFundBlog-
ger.com, was taking off and quickly became the number one most widelyvisited web site on hedge funds.
I decided to ﬂy solo and start my own ﬁrm in 2008. We now run three
main product and service lines:
1.Our training programs such as the CHP Designation, Hedge Fund
Startup Kit, and Hedge Fund Marketing Mechanics hedge funds
2.Our blog network on hedge funds, private equity, mutual funds, al-
ternative investments and capital raising where we provide over 5,000
original articles, videos, and interviews
3.Our capital-raising tools and investor databases, which have now been
used by over 1,600 fund managers and include HedgeFundDirectoryPro.
com, HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com, PrivateEquityDirectory.com,
Investor Databases.com, and CapitalRaiserPro.com
Our ﬁrm and team are small but growing. We have a total of 25 full- and
part-time employees and contractors now who help us offer and constantly
update the CHP Designation, blogs, and these capital-raising tools.
DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS
In the spirit of transparency and full disclosure which I recommend withinthis text, I think it is only appropriate to disclose my own interests. I wasonly able to write this book based on my current relationships, consulting
projects, capital-raising experience, and services that my ﬁrm offers. Because
of this, there are overlaps between examples in this book and my ownxiv PREFACE
clients and products. For example, I have asked my closest circle of 30 or
so clients to review my book for feedback or a quote. Also, three out of the25 professionals I interviewed within this book have used my consulting
services in the past, and my ﬁrm has ﬁnancial interests and/or ownership
in the following web sites and resources mentioned within the rest of this
book: CHP Designation (HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com), InvestorDatabases
.com, HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com, PrimeBrokerageGuide.com, Third
PartyMarketing.com, HedgeFundBlogger.com, HedgeFundStartupGuru.com, ThirdPartyMarketing.com, HedgeFundsBook.com, HedgeFund
Premium.com, and FamilyOfﬁcesDatabase.com. My hope is that the over
250 hours of consulting advice and over 50 video modules within this bookare worth far more than any distraction by the handful of mentions of the
web sites or services that we provide.Acknowledgments
Thank you to my father, Thomas Wilson, for pushing me to write my
ﬁrst “real book” based on the consulting, marketing, and writing I have
already done. Thank you to my wife, Adriana, for patiently supporting me
in everything we have been aiming to accomplish. Thank you to Jonathan
King, who woke me up and spurred me to stop ﬂoating through business, to
take control of where I was headed, and to work toward something greater
than average.
Also, a quick thank-you to someone who is probably too busy to ever
read this sentence: Jeffrey Gitomer. If it were not for the inspiration obtainedthrough his writing, I would have never learned to kick my own or started a
blog, newsletter, or book. My constant push to give away more writing and
free educational materials can be attributed directly to Gitomer.
Above all else, thank you to the more than 900,000 professionals who
have e-mailed our team, downloaded our free hedge fund blog book, com-
pleted our CHP Designation hedge fund training program, and used ourcapital, raising resources. Your support, loyalty, and feedback are what
drove me to publish this text, and have been the source of ideas for every
product and service we offer. Thank you for sharing your time and thoughtswith me.
xvIntroduction
What if you sat down with 30 hedge fund veterans and picked their brains?
What if you spent over $80,000 hiring professionals with seven to
30 or more years of experience to provide you their insights on what isdeveloping in the hedge fund industry, and what is important now?
This is the premise on which I constructed The Hedge Fund Book:
A Training Manual for Professionals and Capital-Raising Executives .
This book is a discussion, a captured forum, not a dissertation, letter to
Congress, or formal legal document. You will ﬁnd less formality here thanin most books, because that is how I am used to writing and transferringknowledge through speeches, e-mails, and blog posts. Some may appreciate
this approach and form of communication; others will surely not.
The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for Professionals and
Capital-Raising Executives will provide many beneﬁts to those seeking to
understand and work in this ﬁeld. Our team at the Hedge Fund Group has
raised millions of dollars of capital for hedge funds and personally workedwith over 1,000 fund managers over the past several years. In the past we
have freely shared our knowledge through our blogs, which you may still
access today. They include:
/squaresolidHedgeFundBlogger.com
/squaresolidHedgeFundsCareer.com
/squaresolidThirdPartyMarketing.com
/squaresolidFamilyOfﬁcesGroup.com
/squaresolidHedgeFundStartupGuru.com
/squaresolidCommoditiesAndFuturesGuide.com
/squaresolidPrimeBrokerageGuide.com
/squaresolidPrivateEquityBlogger.com
In addition to the more than 10,000 articles provided in these blogs,
our free e-book has also been downloaded more than 100,000 times. Thesearticles and resources were given away freely to develop relationships with
those who found value in the resources.
In an effort to now make this book worth more than the retail price, we
include many diverse types of educational resources including case studies,
1The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 2 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
examples, interviews, best practices, review questions, and video resources
to help readers learn more about hedge funds. These interviews and videoswere produced by hedge fund principals and consultants who normally
either do not provide such advice or typically charge $200 to $475 per hour
for their time. My hope is that the value of these additional resources alone
will be worth more than what you paid to obtain this book. If you add up
the 250-plus hours that went into putting this book together with all of the
experienced professionals we interviewed, there is more than $80,500 worthof advice contained in this text. Here are some more details on the different
resources included in this text and how they operate:
/squaresolidInterviews . Over 20 interviews complete this training manual for the
hedge fund industry, including many of the full transcripts in this text.
The advice comes directly from numerous veterans in the industry, so
individual readers do not need to interview all of them directly.
/squaresolidVideo resources. We have also created a series of over 40 video resources
which act as a supplement to this training manual. Throughout this book
there are references to speciﬁc video resources, and the complete list ofvideos available may be seen at http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Videos.
/squaresolidFrequently asked questions. Our team at the Hedge Fund Group has
received and sent over 800,000 e-mails since our ﬁrm was started in2007. We have received thousands of e-mails on capital raising, starting
a hedge fund, institutionalization, and hedge fund careers. I have used
about 40 of the most frequent of these questions to create Chapter 9 of
this book. Some professionals may ﬁnd this resource more valuable than
the rest of the chapter-by-chapter instruction and interview content.
/squaresolidWhy important. Each chapter begins with a short section on why the
chapter is critical to the health and growth of the hedge fund as a
business. This provision guides the reader as to which chapters will bemost relevant to his particular career or business.
/squaresolidChapter review questions. Each chapter concludes with several review
questions for those professors and trainers who have agreed to use thismanual as part of their university course. These will also be helpful
for those who are completing the hedge fund training and certiﬁcation
program referred to in this text as the Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional(CHP) Designation Program (www.HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com).
I recently participated in a training session with Eben Pagan in Los
Angeles at a marketing conference on how business is typically conducted.He told an interesting story. Eben spoke about how the streets in Boston
are actually old cow paths that the city decided to just pave over to create
the roads of the city. The result is a very complicated maze of one-wayIntroduction 3
streets that really only make sense to the most veteran cab drivers. This
is not the cows’ fault. They simply walked typically in the direction ofleast resistance. Nobody stepped back and looked at where the cows had
wandered and asked if there was a better way to get the project done—they
simply followed where cows had walked in the past.
Eben’s point in telling this story was that in every business, every form
of marketing, and even in the hedge fund business, there are cow paths
everywhere. The question is whether you and your business are wanderingaround on the cow paths of what others have done in the past, or building
a super highway straight toward your goal.
Areas to examine for hedge fund managers could include hiring, cap-
ital raising, employee management, performance reporting, transparency,
governance, and investor relations. It helps to step back and look at com-
petitors, other industries, and steps needed to complete the work we are
trying to complete, to see if there is a more direct or efﬁcient way of fully
accomplishing it.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund cow paths, please type this URL intoyour Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/CowCHAPTER 1
Hedge Fund Fundamentals
Training is everything. The peach was once a bitter almond;
cauliﬂower is nothing but cabbage with a college education.
—Mark Twain
This chapter provides a brief 20,000-foot-view introduction to hedge funds
and provides a context for the content of this book. In this chapter I brieﬂy
cover the history of hedge funds, important deﬁnitions, the hedge fund
ecosystem, media portrayal of hedge funds, ﬁve industry trends, regulations,
and the future of hedge funds.
Why important : This chapter is the foundation for the rest of this book.
If you have more than ﬁve years of industry experience, you may want toskim this chapter and skip to the chapter review questions to check yourlevel of industry knowledge.
What this chapter is not : This book is not a thorough review of hedge
fund investment strategies or analytics; those topics are already covered in
dozens of other texts, including two that are required in the Certiﬁed Hedge
Fund Professional (CHP) Designation Program. See these required books
and other recommendations at HedgeFundBookstore.com.
What isa hedge fund? The one-sentence deﬁnition of a hedge fund is
“a private investment vehicle that charges its investors two types of fees: a
management fee and a performance fee.” Any more speciﬁc deﬁnition will
lead to conﬂicts in the industry today, as it has grown in many directions.
The management fee is a standard fee based on total assets under manage-ment and it typically runs between 1 and 2 percent. The second type of fee
typically charged by hedge funds is a performance fee; typically this is 10 to
20 percent and is charged based on the performance achieved by the fund.If a hedge fund has 10 percent positive performance for a single year and its
performance fee is 20 percent, the hedge fund’s management would get to
5The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for 
Professionals and Capital-Raising Executives  
by Richard C. Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Richard C. Wilson 6 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
keep 2 percent of that 10 percent gain as part of their proﬁts, a reward for
achieving these positive returns for their investors.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Watch a video explaining what a hedge fund is and is not, here:HedgeFundTraining.com/What-is-a-Hedge-Fund?
HEDGE FUND MECHANICS AND STATISTICS
It is important to know that while these fee ﬁgures just mentioned are typical,the hedge fund industry has become competitive and diverse. There are nowhedge funds operating that charge a 0 percent management fee while others
charge 3 percent. Wide variations in performance fee levels may also be
seen. One important aspect of this dual-level fee structure is the incentiveit sets in place for hedge fund managers. While many hedge fund managers
have already invested their own assets in the portfolio they are managing,
remunerating the managers based on positive performance and not just totalassets under management rewards those who can achieve consistent year-
after-year gains. This in turn leads to rich compensation for those who can
outperform the majority, and it attracts the best of talent to the industry. Aportfolio manager can potentially earn two to three times as much working
for a hedge fund as he could working for a similar size mutual fund or
long-only optimization ﬁrm.
Investments made in hedge funds are typically seen as medium to long
term for several reasons. The main reason is liquidity. Most hedge funds
have lock-up periods of one to two years, and many restrict redemptions
for as long as three years after the initial investment is made. A lock-up
period simply means that the investor may not redeem his invested fundsuntil this period has expired. These lock-up periods are put into place so
that the hedge fund may invest in various assets and will have more control
and ﬂexibility in the timing of its purchasing and selling of these assets over
time. Without lock-up periods, a manager may make a long-term investment
in a security, for example, and a new investor could come and request his
assets back during a weak point in the markets, forcing the manager to sellthe security at a loss to meet that redemption request. While lock-up periods
help managers in running their funds, they are seen as a major concern and
drawback by institutions and high net worth (HNW) investors. While thisHedge Fund Fundamentals 7
book does not cover hedge fund replication or publicly traded hedge funds,
these are two areas worth additional research if this topic is of interest tothe reader.
There are between 100,000 and 150,000 professionals who work
directly within the hedge fund industry and another 1,000,000-plus pro-
fessionals who work with hedge funds in some way, indirectly or as part of
a broader platform of services. There are between 10,000 and 25,000 hedge
funds in existence today, depending on whose statistics and databases youtrust most, and new funds are launched daily. The average hedge fund has
just around $40 million in assets under management (AUM), while many
start with just $500,000 to $5 million, and a larger group runs over $1 billionin assets.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund liquidity and lock-up periods, pleasetype this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
Liquidity
Additional Common Hedge Fund Terms
/squaresolidHurdle rate : A hurdle rate is a set performance ﬁgure that must
be achieved before any performance fees will be calculated or paidto the hedge fund manager. For example, a hedge fund may have its
hurdle rate set at 3 percent so that any performance above 3 percent
will be considered outperformance. Hurdle rates avoid having investorspay high fees for low-single-digit portfolio performance.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the deﬁnition of a hurdle rate, please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Hurdle
/squaresolidHigh-water mark: A high-water mark is a tool by which hedge fund
managers can assure investors that they will not be charged performance8 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
fees after portfolio losses until the fund has made up those past losses.
In other words, if a hedge fund manager has a loss of 5 percent inone year, he may not be paid any performance fees in the following
year until he has ﬁrst regained that loss, restoring the fund to the high-
water mark point. Again, the high-water mark protects investors from
paying the performance fee until the manager has made up the ground
he previously lost in the portfolio.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the deﬁnition of a high-water mark, please
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
High
/squaresolidGating clause: A gating clause allows a hedge fund manager, under
certain circumstances, to restrict or completely cut off redemptions fromthe portfolio due to market illiquidity or speciﬁc sets of circumstances
set forth in the contract. This term has been highly debated recently due
to hundreds of funds “closing the gate” or enacting this clause in theiragreements with investors.
For more deﬁnitions, please see the Glossary at the back of this book.
HISTORY OF HEDGE FUNDS
Financial journalist, author, and sociologist Alfred W. Jones started the ﬁrst
hedge fund in 1949 while working for Fortune . The fund was started on the
belief that the movements of individual securities were due to both the per-
formance of that speciﬁc security and the performance of the broader mar-kets. His strategy was to address this by investing in securities that seemed
to be positioned to outperform the market, while shorting (see Glossary) or
selling those securities that seemed likely to underperform the market. Thegoal was to neutralize or cancel out market risk by allowing the portfolio
to hedge against negative market movements. This is how the ﬁrst hedge
fund was created. This idea was unique in that it was designed to do well,or at least relatively well, during volatile or even bear market conditions.
This new method of managing portfolios of equities started becoming
popular in the 1960s, and by the 1970s there were over 150 hedge fundsHedge Fund Fundamentals 9
in existence managing close to $1 billion in assets. Some early hedge fund
managers were Warren Buffett, Michael Steinhardt, and George Soros. Sincethen hedge funds have evolved to include commodities, bonds, real estate,
and other types of assets.
Over time, the term hedge fund took on the broader deﬁnition of a gen-
eral private investment partnership, which typically includes management
and performance fees as the only common denominator. Even this deﬁni-
tion is now becoming dated as more hedge funds and ﬁrms that run hedgefunds become publicly traded companies. Hedge funds are hard to under-
stand as a whole because they are diverse and somewhat secretive. Hedge
funds are secretive because of strict advertising and public offering rulesas well as to keep their investment process, trading strategy, and positions
from their competition. The hedge fund industry is very competitive and
entrepreneurial.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the history of the hedge fund industry, please
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/History
MEDIA PORTRAYAL OF HEDGE FUNDS
Along the way there have been hedge fund blowups (that have had perfor-mance dives and made public headlines), fraud cases, insider trading, andmisreporting. While the whole idea of what a hedge fund does has been
growing, public knowledge of these vehicles is still relatively limited and
misunderstood, and hedge funds are often in the bottom 1 percent of the in-
dustry in terms of ethics or performance that makes the headlines each day.
Hedge funds are now mentioned in thousands of magazines and newspapers
each month.
There are often misconceptions formed about hedge funds, which are
largely caused by reading mainstream news sources on the topic. Here arethe top three misconceptions caused by the media:
1.Hedge funds are large multibillion-dollar investment vehicles that can
destroy companies. Reality : While the largest of hedge funds do control10 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
a large share of total assets under management, the industry is actually
made up of mostly $1 million to $200 million size hedge fund managers.
2.Hedge funds are not regulated. Reality : Many hedge funds are already
regulated at the asset level based on what they are investing in.
3.Hedge funds are always committing fraud and blowing up their funds.
Reality : Less than 0.1 percent of the industry is ever accused of any
fraud claims, and a 2006 study by Capco shows that over half of all
hedge fund failures are actually due to operational business reasons andnot performance-related issues.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video called “Media Portrayal of Hedge Funds:Misconceptions and Myths,” please type this URL into your Web
browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Media
HEDGE FUND ECOSYSTEM
Hedge fund managers do not work in a vacuum where they coordinate
directly with investors and receive no assistance from outside parties. Most
hedge fund managers work with at least three of the ﬁve types of service
providers shown in Figure 1.1.
It is important to know the function of each of these parties to under-
stand how hedge funds operate, and how they invest and control their
assets. Here are deﬁnitions and explanations for each of these serviceprovider types:
1.Prime brokerage . Prime brokers provide a package of services typi-
cally within the largest business of an investment bank. The following
services are sometimes offered by prime brokers: custody, securities
lending, ﬁnancing, customized technology, operational support, capitalintroduction, and other trading-related services.
2.Fund administration . Fund administration ﬁrms provide support and
operational services to hedge fund managers. These services may in-clude accounting services, operational/ﬁnance services, settlement of
daily trades, calculation and payment of distributions, and payment
of fund expenses.Hedge Fund Fundamentals 11
Prime 
Brokerage
Fund
Administration
Third Party 
MarketingLegal and
ComplianceAuditing
Hedge Fund 
Manager
FIGURE 1.1 Types of Service Providers Used by Hedge Funds
3.Third Party marketing . Third party marketing ﬁrms are independent
hedge fund marketing consultants who work to raise capital for two toﬁve or more hedge funds at any one point in time for a single source of
investors, or for multiple distribution channels. They typically require
some sort of retainer along with sharing of 20 percent of both the
management and performance fees while the funds raised stay invested.
4.Legal and compliance . Legal and compliance ﬁrms become more im-
portant every year within the hedge fund industry. Hedge funds uselaw ﬁrms for complicated formation processes, ongoing business legal
considerations, and ongoing compliance work as well.
5.Auditing. Auditing ﬁrms are used by hedge funds on a quarterly and
annual basis to verify their performance and accounting ﬁgures. Some
hedge funds use auditing ﬁrms for monthly checks or to prepare for an
annual audit as well.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the hedge fund ecosystem, please type this URL
into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Ecosystem12 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Top Four Hedge Fund Industry Trends
Understanding the hedge fund industry requires knowing what is going on
now and also identifying current trends affecting how hedge funds operate,
invest, form, and trade. Following are the top four hedge fund industry
trends:
1.Recent poor absolute hedge fund performance and fraud has led to in-
creasing pressure from investors for additional transparency and levelsof governance. This is being done to ensure that managers adhere to
their investment mandates, only restrict investor liquidity when neces-
sary, and ensure that internal controls, checks, and responsibilities areproperly carried out. Independent administration ﬁrms and directors are
now required by many investors and boards of advisers.
2.The collapse of Lehman Brothers left some hedge funds in London with-
out access to their assets, causing poor performance and in some cases
fund failures. Since this event, hedge funds with over $30 million inassets have been investigating and implementing multi–prime broker-
age models, rather than invite risk by working with one single prime
broker. In the past, prime brokerage ﬁrms would conduct due dili-gence on the soundness of their potential hedge fund clients. Now the
research is done in both directions, with hedge funds screening prime
brokers and vice versa. Some newcomers to the industry are now gain-ing strong market share because they are seen as a safe place to do
business.
3.The use of outside capital-raising resources, investor databases, and
third-party marketing ﬁrms is on the rise. The capital-raising environ-
ment is more competitive, and hedge fund managers are forced to evolve
their investor relationship cultivation systems, capital introduction re-sources, and investor contacts in order to compete.
4.Investors increasingly want to work with more institutional hedge fund
managers. This typically means hedge funds with over $100 million to
$250 million in assets under management. More speciﬁcally, it refers
to the types of operational processes, technology, risk management,trading, and governance features that tend to be in place with funds
that have $1 billion in assets under management. This has always
been a challenge for emerging managers, who have limited access tohigh-pedigree (well respected and accomplished) team members, in-
vestors comfortable with small fund managers, and many times even
the knowledge needed to create a more institutional-quality hedge fundoperation.Hedge Fund Fundamentals 13
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the top four hedge fund trends, please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Trends
FUTURE OF THE HEDGE FUND INDUSTRY
During the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008, many journalists wrote about the deathof hedge funds and how the industry was about to burn to the ground. This
was taken seriously by only a handful of professionals who actually worked
in the industry. The future of the hedge fund industry is actually bright dueto several short- and long-term factors.
The strongest argument for the strength of the hedge fund industry is the
constant innovation that occurs in this industry. Hedge funds are constantlyusing new trading techniques, incorporating new asset classes, including
additional equity markets in their scope, and taking on new ﬁnancing and
investing roles to expand their total market share. Most hedge funds onthe edge of innovation are small, hungry teams that are driven to succeed,
and they know that they will be rewarded handsomely for doing so. The
combination of relatively low barriers of entry and direct ﬁnancial rewardsare a formula for continued growth and natural positive evolution of the
industry as a whole.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the future of the hedge fund industry, please see
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Future
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Hedge funds have been growing rapidly over the past 20 years, and whiletheir growth is now slowing down, they are becoming more diverse and14 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
innovative in their investment strategies. As the industry evolves, service
providers are becoming more like business partners and are vital to the busi-ness success of hedge fund managers. In the future, hedge funds are likely
to develop even more investment terms, investor agreements, and perfor-
mance fee structures to further align the interests of the investor with the
hedge fund portfolio manager and principal.
Free Resource: The Free Hedge Fund E-Book, at HedgeFundsBook.com.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.What is a hedge fund?
a.A private investment partnership that typically includes the manager
of the portfolio receiving both a management and performance fee.
b.A private equity fund that also employs hedging tactics using equity
securities.
c.A private investment partnership that is 100 percent unregulated and
can use leverage to produce higher absolute returns for investors.
d.The roles of the speciﬁc board members.
2.Which of the following is not one of the top trends affecting the hedge
fund industry right now?
a.Investors are seeking to work with more institutional-quality fund
managers.
b.Raising capital is becoming more competitive, so utilizing resources
such as third-party marketers and investor databases is on the rise.
c.Most hedge fund managers are now outsourcing their portfolio man-
agement activities to leading mutual funds, who trade the actual
account in the hedge fund.
d.Fund administrators, prime brokerage ﬁrms, compliance ﬁrms, third
party marketers, and auditing ﬁrms are becoming increasingly im-
portant to the operations and effectiveness of a hedge fund business.
3.True or false: Due to the concentrated nature of hedge fund strategies,
it is likely that another large market swing could eliminate the industry
completely.
4.Hedge funds typically charge a percent management fee and
percent performance fee.
a.3.5, 15
b.2, 25
c.1, 15
d.2, 20
5.True or false: A high-water mark allows a hedge fund manager, under
certain circumstances, to restrict or completely cut off redemptions fromHedge Fund Fundamentals 15
the portfolio due to market illiquidity or speciﬁc sets of circumstances
set forth in the contract.
6.True or false: Hedge funds are the one type of investment that is com-
pletely unregulated, and that is why investment into this vehicle type is
restricted to institutional and accredited investors.
7.Most of the hedge fund industry is made up of managers who manage
between and in assets under management (AUM).
a.$1 million, $10 million
b.$100 million, $750 million
c.$1 million, $200 million
d.$50 million, $200 million
8.True or false: Financial journalist, author, and sociologist Andrew Lo
started the ﬁrst hedge fund in 1949 while working for Fortune .
9.A lock-up period is often put in place so that
a.A hedge fund may invest in various assets and will have more control
and ﬂexibility in the timing of its purchasing and selling of theseassets.
b.A hedge fund may lock up an investor into investing only in its fund
during a certain period of time, typically lasting 18 months to twoyears. This is put into place to protect the intellectual capital that
may be shared with other managers in the industry.
c.An investor can lock in his investment with the hedge fund and be
guaranteed additional capacity in the hedge fund for the next two to
three years after his initial investment. This is most commonly used
by institutional investors.
10. True or false: Due to being highly liquid vehicles, hedge funds are often
invested in for an average of six to nine weeks and offer liquidity on
a weekly basis. This is why the industry has been able to quickly gainassets for institutional investors of many types.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 2
Institutionalization
and Operations
The most important contribution management needs to make
in the twenty-ﬁrst century is to increase the productivity
of knowledge work and the knowledge worker.
—Peter F. Drucker
Astudy in 2006 by Capco shows that at least half of hedge fund failures
are due to operational reasons rather than performance reasons. This
runs contrary to what most would expect. To make matters more challeng-
ing, most fund managers come to the business with portfolio management
or trading experience, not operational fund management experience. This
chapter provides some operational best practices, tips, and recommenda-
tions from experts in the industry.
Why important : Everyone, including traders, service providers, mar-
keters, and portfolio managers, contributes to the institutional processes
and operations of a great hedge fund, and there are hundreds of tactics that
may be employed as a fund’s business grows. One thing is certain: If you are
looking to grow your hedge fund to over $100 million in assets, not knowing
how to improve the institutional quality of your hedge fund will result in
a loss of assets to those who do understand and adapt to the institutional
demands on hedge funds.
The hedge fund industry is becoming simultaneously more competitive
and diverse. A fund manager starting business today will face more hurdles
than any manager in the past in terms of regulations, objections, and gate-
keepers. One of the most difﬁcult ongoing challenges for managers from$1 million to $1 billion in assets under management (AUM) is the con-
stant need to increase the institutional quality of the hedge fund’s portfolio
17The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 18 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
management, operations, marketing, and risk management. At the same
time, most hedge fund managers have no mentor, mastermind group, orconsistent help in becoming more institutional in how they operate. This
chapter is meant to help ﬁll that void in the industry and provide some tan-
gible steps that managers can take to improve their processes and operations.
STEPHEN ABRAHAMS, VICE PRESIDENT OF
MARKETING FOR A LONDON-BASED HEDGE FUND
Our ﬁrst interview is with Stephen Abrahams, who has 20 years of ﬁnancial
advisory experience, from tied agent to index fund adviser (IFA) to offshore
IFA, and has most recently been raising capital for a boutique hedge fundmanager in London.
Richard Wilson: Stephen, from your experience in raising capital, what are
the ﬁve top things that you believe hedge fund managers can do to become
more institutional?
Stephen Abrahams: I believe that the top ﬁve things hedge funds managers
can do would be:
1.Understand their strengths and weaknesses—know what their unique
selling proposition (USP) really is.
2.Have better than average marketing materials and sale literature that
is constructed by someone who knows what investors are looking for.
3.Employ an in-house salesman or hire a third-party marketer, or both.
The managers can then concentrate on what they are good at by trading
and managing the portfolio.
4.Take the long-term view and invest long-term; institutions take their
time to make decisions.
5.Listen closely to objections, investor feedback, and clues to institu-
tional checkboxes such as liquidity, size, transparency, and so on.
Richard Wilson: Great. That sounds like good advice. Many of the hedge
fund managers I speak with are still trying to raise capital without any
dedicated resource reaching out to new potential investors on a daily ba-sis, and I always believe that is a mistake. It takes a concerted effort to
grow assets in this competitive environment, and as you’ve suggested, this
process can also help improve fund operations and positioning as an insti-tutional quality fund. Many investors want to become more institutional
to attract more capital to their funds. Is there any magic bullet that you
have found to attract capital while you still have a small AUM?Institutionalization and Operations 19
Stephen Abrahams: Deﬁnitely not a magic bullet, as institutions have a tick-
box mentality (very detailed, step-by-step checklist-type due diligence)and size does matter. You really need to have a set of contacts that look
to invest in smaller funds to get you to that magic $100 million, which
isn’t easy and it takes a long time and a lot of hard work to accomplish.
Richard Wilson: I also liked two things you mentioned there, that there is
no magic bullet, and “that magic $100 million” mark. I agree that there is
no magic bullet in becoming more institutional or raising capital. It reallydoes take day-after-day hard work and consistent, tenacious relationship
development and adjustment of your marketing strategy. Also, while some
research organizations might deﬁne emerging hedge funds as any fundswith less than $250 million in AUM, in the real world 80 percent of the
industry would consider a fund with over $100 million in AUM as coming
out of the emerging manager zone.
I once had the fun job of calling every single institutional consulting ﬁrm
in the United States—over 200 of them. At that time I was raising capital
for a $600 million fund of hedge funds and a $10 million long/short fund.What I found was that over 95 percent of these consultants who represent
large institutional investors require that you have $100 million or more in
assets before they will seriously consider recommending you to their clients.In other words, they may complete some due diligence on you as an exercise
or in anticipation that you may grow to over $100 million in size, but you
won’t get any real asset-growing traction with most of them until you get to
that magic $100 million mark, as Stephen put it.
BOB PARDO, CEO AND PRESIDENT, PARDO
CAPITAL LIMITED
Our next interview is with Bob Pardo of Pardo Capital Limited. Mr. Pardo
has been a commodity trading adviser since 1996 and has worked with
a wide variety of strategies, both short- and longer-term. Pardo Capital
has an 11-year track record and has managed up to $50 million duringoperations, and they have picked up a lot of best practices along the way.
Their investment strategies are based on their proprietary Walk-Forward
Analysis methodology as described in Mr. Pardo’s book, The Evaluation
and Optimization of Trading Strategies (John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
Richard Wilson: What have you learned not to do, or what have you stopped
doing related to trading or operations that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position20 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
as a high-quality fund management business? Any lessons or tips to share
on this point?
Bob Pardo: I would not say that we have stopped doing anything. I would
say that we have reprioritized our research and development process to
get viable products out there when they are in a form that is of interest to
our investment space.
Richard Wilson: Besides AUM, what do you believe is most important for
a hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institution-alizing a hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research?
Pedigree?
Bob Pardo: It depends where the hedge fund is to start. They are all im-
portant. However, if you do not have a viable and competitive product,
of course, you do not have a business. Assuming that, I would then rank
pedigree, research, and infrastructure.
Richard Wilson: I agree, lots of times when professionals ask how they can
raise $30 million for their hedge fund, the most honest response is “Itdepends.” How has your ﬁrm gotten past the “under $100 million, no
institutional quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smaller
investors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?Any lessons learned here?
Bob Pardo: The only real lesson to be learned here is the realization
that with less than $100 million AUM, there are a lot of institutions
of all types who will not be able to deal with you for a whole range of
reasons. The ﬂip side, then, is to identify and focus on those who will.
Of course, there is the occasional opportunity to attract a $100 millioninvestor and then just go on to the next stage of development.
Richard Wilson: What operational resources does your ﬁrm leverage or use
to help outsource work or improve the efﬁciency of the work your fundfaces to keep business moving forward each month?
Bob Pardo: We outsource a lot and it has its pros and cons. It is ideal for
a small operation. At a certain size, however, a lot of outsourcing stops
making sense. That being said, given the maturing of the entire space,
outsourcing can often be done quite cost effectively.
Richard Wilson: I agree, every hedge fund I have ever worked with out-
sourced many functions. It almost never makes sense to do everything
yourself, and on some level you simply can’t while still offering a greatproduct to your clients. Do your ﬁrm’s marketers undergo formal capital
raising or marketing training?
Bob Pardo: At this point, no. At the higher levels, we are interested in
attracting proven talent. We feel that we can bring a lot to the table with
our various types of expertise. At the level of newer talent, we prefer to
groom in-house. In the end, after our intellectual property, our people areInstitutionalization and Operations 21
our number one resource. They represent stability and the potential for
future growth
Richard Wilson: That will be refreshing for some young professionals to
hear, who want to get into the industry. Many professionals who contact
us regarding the CHP Designation have the view that if they didn’t com-
plete two or three hedge fund internships and obtain some sort of entry
level hedge fund position in the past, there is not a whole lot of hope for
them in the industry. I disagree, as there are many ﬁrms like yours whowould like to train someone from the ground up.
Do you recommend that hedge fund start-ups begin raising capital from
day 1, or are you in the camp that believes that a two- to four-year trackrecord should be developed ﬁrst?
Bob Pardo: Hit the ground running. We made the mistake of waiting, and
aside from costing us a fortune in lost revenues, it hurt us in other ways as
well. The industry has changed dramatically over the past several years.
A two- to four-year track record is no longer a necessity in many cases.Pedigree and the proverbial “good story” carry a lot more weight these
days.
Richard Wilson: I agree. There are two main reasons why I think it is never
too early to begin marketing. First, a lot of business is done based on trust
and relationships, so the earlier you start the stronger your relationships
get. Second, by starting your marketing early, you move up the learning
curve on what investors expect, what marketing materials need to be in
place, and what resources may need to be dedicated to this type of work.
What is the critical issue that decides whether you work with a par-
ticular consultant, service provider, or marketer? What is the one thing
that you always look for? Good service? Recommendations from others?
Branding? Experience?
Bob Pardo: Experience and credibility and the ability for the service provider
to demonstrate a track record, preferably, or a workable plan to provide
the exact service that we need.
VINOD PAUL, MANAGING DIRECTOR
OF SERVICE AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT,
EZE CASTLE INTEGRATION
Our next interview is with Vinod Paul, managing director of service and
business development at Eze Castle Integration, a leading and well-respectedconsulting and technology solutions ﬁrm which services hedge fund and in-
vestment ﬁrms. Leading a talented team of customer service and engineering
professionals, Vinod Paul oversees all customer-facing engagements for Eze22 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Castle Integration. Vinod joined the company in 2002, and his responsibili-
ties include service delivery and business development for the ﬁrm.
Richard Wilson: Vinod, what are some of the institutionalization and op-
erational improvement trends that you are seeing with your hedge fundclients?
Vinod Paul: What I see is that they are reinvesting their tools. These start out
as nice-to-haves and then turn into must-haves. An example of this is ordermanagement systems. Smaller ﬁrms with just one or two prime brokers
do this in Excel, but as they grow past the $100 million they typically
bring on prime broker numbers three, four, and ﬁve, and they need anorder management system that ﬁts their needs better. Other tools that
were nice-to-haves and now are need-to-haves are customer relationship
management (CRM) tools—they need this to manage investor reporting.
Richard Wilson: I have found that SalesForce.com is the most popular CRM
tool for hedge funds today. What have you seen?
Vinod Paul: We see a variety and offer our own CRM solution. This is
because we have about 650 hedge funds within our umbrella, and the
issue with SalesForce.com is that it is very vanilla. It was not created forhedge funds and investment ﬁrms exclusively.
Richard Wilson: Are hedge funds missing the boat on operational best prac-
tices? Any advice?
Vinod Paul: The dynamics are changing. Hedge funds used to launch with
little organization, wearing a lot of hats. In the past, compliance used to
be half-done or outsourced, and this tool is very deﬁned. Now there aremultiple tools and guides and experts on what you should be doing each
month and who should be doing it. There are now outsourcing services
for this area, and this is a growing importance, so we are seeing a lot ofﬁrms invest up front in that now.
Richard Wilson: You work with literally hundreds of hedge funds who are
always reinvesting in their infrastructure and operations. Any low-hanging
fruit in terms of institutionalization? Low-cost actions?
Vinod Paul: Yes, here is one that is very low cost—this is something we
don’t see many funds doing: Large hedge funds do business continuity
planning. Lots of new hedge funds are asked about disaster recovery,
but many hedge funds ignore this. You have someone go in and look atprocesses going on within the ﬁrm: Who is doing what, how does your
team work together from different locations, how will you operate? This
is a very low-cost solution, and many ﬁrms should be doing this. Thisonly costs a few hundred dollars to implement and have in place each
month. The large funds understand the importance of business continuity
planning as it ties to disaster recovery. Most funds should be doing this.Institutionalization and Operations 23
Richard Wilson: Great piece of advice. That sounds like one more puzzle
piece that hedge fund managers can clue into within this book in terms ofﬁguring out the 20 to 30 things they are not doing but could be to become
a more institutional-quality organization.
You work with so many diverse clients—this may be challenging, but
what is the most common bottleneck for further growth of individual
hedge funds?
Vinod Paul: The biggest challenge is that nobody wants to be the ﬁrst one in.
Every investor wants to go in with others. One person had ﬁve investors
come in at one time so that nobody was the ﬁrst group to put their toe in
the water. I thought that was a unique approach that I don’t see very often.
Richard Wilson: What do you see in terms of growing a track record before
marketing a hedge fund? Are professionals building up three- to four-year
track records ﬁrst, or marketing their funds right out of the gates with
perhaps immature operations in place?
Vinod Paul: A track record is of huge importance. Most small funds are
now starting much smaller than they wanted to. Lots of them are working
within the fund, trading for six months or a year before dedicating a full
team to raising capital, because investors sometimes like to see people whocan be successful on their own. They want to know the business is sound
and not based on raising a large amount of short-term money. I think the
money and talent are both out there but people are being very cautious,
wanting at least six months of proof. The investor wants to make sure the
manager has something at stake as well in the hedge fund business.
Richard Wilson: Have you seen any uptick in action within the hedge fund
start-up space? Our team has seen dozens of managers moving from in-
vestment banks and trading roles into launching their own hedge fund
business.
Vinod Paul: Yes, in the past three months, tremendous uptick in individuals
starting a hedge fund. Many professionals are leaving large organizations
and are making investments and taking that risk now. A lot of individuals
are taking this risk.
Richard Wilson: What would you suggest are the top three types of tools
that are most powerful or useful for hedge fund managers to use in their
business?
Vinod: Most hedge fund managers are not educated on the full array of
tools available to them today. If they need something, chances are the
tools are out there and they are affordable. A few years ago infrastructure
used to cost $200,000 when investors wanted sound disaster recovery,compliance, and infrastructure on a very high level. For example, we have
an enterprise-level infrastructure. We can split that up and offer even just
two to three people a technology platform that has compliance, disaster24 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
recovery, and business continuity all tied in. This is common now, to
have the tools of a 1,000-person shop but only spend hundreds per userper month, not $200,000 on day one. This is now available from many
vendors throughout the industry, and hedge fund managers should take
advantage of this as they grow in order to get more done with fewer
dollars. The top three tools I would suggest relate to:
1.Sound infrastructure setup—real corporate e-mail, real BlackBerry
technology, ﬁle services, remote archiving, and so on.
2.Disaster recovery, so you can transfer with ease to another location in
case of something happening.
3.Compliance—covering e-mail, infrastructure management (IM), poli-
cies, procedures, tools in place to ensure you are compliant with allregulations.
Richard Wilson: What trends do you see within the $1 billion-plus hedge
fund space? What are they investing in?
Vinod Paul: Due to the size of their business they do not need every tool for
risk management from an outside vendor, but they are looking at the best
tools and being smart about their investments. They have larger teams so
they have more educated professionals, or they engage consultants to helpthem ﬁnd the better tools out there. A lot of these funds are being smarter
about what they are doing because they have most expertise in-house and
more choices in the marketplace.
Richard Wilson: Any last pieces of advice for hedge fund managers or pro-
fessionals in the industry?
Vinod Paul: I deal with a lot of start-ups and professionals who are starting
a hedge fund. I think the most successful guys are those who educate
themselves. They take the time to really check out what options are outthere right now, and don’t rely on rumors of how much things cost. There
is so much competition within the information technology (IT) space, and
this is a huge beneﬁt to hedge fund managers who now can pay much lessthan they may have just ﬁve to seven years ago. Every manager should
educate themselves, differentiate themselves in how their processes are
run and infrastructure is built.
NAKUL NAYYAR, QUANTITATIVE
TRADING/SUPPORT, QUAD CAPITAL
Also for this chapter and for Chapter 5 on starting a hedge fund, I inter-
viewed Nakul Nayyar from a U.S.-based hedge fund manager. He sharedhis experience on creating a more institutional-quality trading environment.Institutionalization and Operations 25
Richard Wilson: Could you please explain your professional background in
hedge funds and trading in general? Please also include the story of howyou got started in the industry, if you don’t mind.
Nakul Nayyar: I graduated in 2002 from Johns Hopkins University into
what was a difﬁcult job environment. My ﬁrst job out of school was
actually in manufacturing, working as a project manager for a Fortune
500 company. After a few years of executing projects all over the North-
east, I began seriously contemplating a career change. I was actively man-aging my own accounts at the time and had some successful ﬁrst attempts.
With more luck than skill, I’m sure, at that time, I decided to leap ﬁrst
into trading. I quit my job, packed a suitcase, and moved to New YorkCity. After a number of interviews—some quite unique, I should add—I
landed a trading assistant role at a proprietary trading ﬁrm. My role was
primarily to research and recommend growth/momentum stocks, using a
mixture of event-driven fundamentals and technical analysis. Addition-
ally, since I had an interest in derivatives, I managed the hedging of theoverall portfolio.
Using that experience as a springboard, and after another set of very
interesting interviews, I joined a small family ofﬁce hedge fund with a focuson systematic and algorithmic-driven trading. Being a small fund, the ﬁrm
had a start-up feel to it and an entrepreneurial spirit, meaning beyond
the unglamorous daily tasks of keeping a fund running, I was allowed
to research my own ideas and strategies and have these implemented.
And while many strategies were automated, there were a few strategies
that required manual execution or intervention. Additionally, as marketconditions or regimes changed, it was important to reﬁne, modify, or
scrap existing strategies. The experience of creating a strategy through
its life cycle (including sometimes its death) was extremely valuable andshaped my philosophy on trading immensely.
Richard Wilson: Thanks for sharing. It is interesting that you worked in
the family ofﬁce environment. I think that the experience of working
in a family ofﬁce is very valuable and often underestimated. I see such a
demand for professionals wanting to work in hedge funds after graduationor some investment banking experience, but hardly anyone asks about
getting into the family ofﬁce industry.
How can a hedge fund manager improve the institutional feel and efﬁ-
ciency of his trading environment? Do you have a few methods or exam-
ples of how this can be accomplished?
Nakul Nayyar: A professional web site with password access is relatively
inexpensive and can be done quickly. For start-ups especially, a web site
allows all interested parties to quickly ﬁnd your ﬁrm online and provides
a perception of professionalism. Try to provide real content on the siteand not some generic marketing talk to get interest. Spend some time on26 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
the bios as well; people are generally most interested in the background
of the managers.
Additionally, there are all kinds of software that can be incorporated
into your existing systems to crunch various statistics, generate reports,
and do a number of other very useful functions without a lot of additional
work. Talk to your brokers, prime brokers, and so on, and see what tools
they may have available for free to assist your business. Or, alternatively,
hiring programmers has become cheaper and cheaper.
Hire or learn quantitative measures and testing techniques even if the
strategy is completely discretionary. Not only can it yield positive results
for your trading, but it can be incorporated into your marketing docu-ments as well. Data-driven research and reporting, in my opinion, is being
valued much more highly than a keen eye or nicely annotated charts.
Richard Wilson: That is great advice—so many nuggets there I’m afraid that
some may be missed. I agree that a professional web site is important, and
I think that providing genuinely valuable content is even more effective. Ithelps build a relationship and position your fund principles or traders as
experts and authorities in the space. This goes a long way with investors
who want to make sure they are working with professionals who arenot green to the business. Also, if anyone out there is looking to hire
programmers, I have successfully hired and managed part-time contract
programmers through a web site called Elance.com. It is a great resource
that I have just started using for our ﬁrm.
Many other experts whom I interview in this book refer to carefully
selecting the right service providers. I think that if you select them appropri-ately, you will have a leg up on competition due to the pedigree large service
providers can lend you and the tools and reporting services they can also
provide. This is especially true while choosing a fund administration ﬁrmand prime broker. Dig into checklists of exactly what they can provide, and
make sure they actually follow through once everything is said and done.
HENDRIK KLEIN, CEO, DA VINCI INVEST LTD.
Our next interview related to fund operations and institutionalization iswith Hendrik Klein, CEO of Da Vinci Invest Ltd., a Zurich-based hedge
fund professional.
Richard Wilson: Hendrik, could you share a bit on your background and
fund so we know the perspective from which you are answering these
questions?Institutionalization and Operations 27
Hendrik Klein: I am CEO and founder of Da Vinci Invest. My specialization
is relative value/volatility arbitrage, but we dare to think out of the box. Soour strategy could be described as global macro (I look at the global mar-
kets with a macro-like approach) or commodity trading adviser (CTA).
This is because we trade listed options and futures mainly. Our current
fund size is $45 million, but we managed already over $300 million in
total in this strategy.
Richard Wilson: Great, it is good to have some insights here from a
European-based hedge fund manager running this type of a strategy.
What operational resources does your ﬁrm leverage or use to help out-
source work or improve the efﬁciency of the work your fund faces to keepbusiness moving forward each month?
Hendrik Klein: Da Vinci Invest is domiciled in a so-called hedge fund hotel .
Richard Wilson: Hedge fund hotels have a mixed reputation here in the
United States, and I know some managers are interested in just ﬁguring
out what services they provide to emerging fund managers. What servicesdoes the hedge fund hotel provide for you right now?
Hendrik Klein: They provide us with bookkeeping, tax advice, and IT main-
tenance. Software development is outsourced to IFIT and other outsidecompanies.
Richard Wilson: How important do you see service providers being to the
success of your fund? What process have you used to select these ser-
vice providers, and what lessons have you learned about working with
both the large and small service providers that your ﬁrm has worked
with?
Hendrik Klein: We underestimated the service providers’ part in the past. It is
very important to have a good administrator, who delivers net asset value
(NAV) in time and accurately. Additional services like sales fee calculationwould be perfect. In the beginning we had an administrator who delivered
NAV six to eight weeks too late. Our auditors never managed to ﬁnish
the audit in the ﬁrst or second quarter.
Richard Wilson: That certainly doesn’t make things any easier while trying
to grow your business. What was the result of that lack of service?
Hendrik Klein: One family ofﬁce did not invest because of that. We lost a
lot of reputation or credibility because of that.
Richard Wilson: That is a good case study, a story that will help managers
pay attention and not underestimate the power of having solid service
provider relationships and processes in place. So many times I stress the
importance of working with solid service providers, but sometimes it takesa story like this to drive the point home.
What is the critical issue that decides whether you work with a par-
ticular consultant, service provider, or marketer? What is the one thing28 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
that you always look for? Good service? Recommendations from others?
Branding? Experience?
Hendrik Klein: He should have time for us. That is, not having too many
clients at the same time. The marketing should be done in good and in
bad times.
Richard Wilson: What are the top three resources or tools that you use to
run your hedge fund that are worth more than anything else? What are
the most valuable resources that you could recommend to others?
Hendrik Klein: We use Bloomberg, Sol-3, and IFIT risk software with stress
test scenarios. We can recommend all of these to hedge fund managers.
In marketing we use Salesforce, but we are thinking about switching toEmnis soon.
Richard Wilson. I have come to ﬁnd that Salesforce is the leading CRM
system for fund managers—it helped me raise capital as well. What is the
most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-month operations?
How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What tools have you foundthat help you manage this?
Hendrik Klein: Positive performance every month end. A strict risk manage-
ment helps.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other pieces of advice related to opera-
tional hedge fund best practices that you could share with other managers
in the industry?
Hendrik Klein: Separate operational power between portfolio management
and risk management.
Richard Wilson: What are your top ﬁve tips for hedge fund managers who
have less than $100 million in assets under management but would like
to improve the institutional quality of their fund?
Hendrik Klein: I actually have several suggestions for hedge fund managers
who want to increase their institutional operations and trading:
/squaresolidLaunch a UCITS III fund, if possible with your strategy.
/squaresolidList your fund on a stock exchange.
/squaresolidSelect the best service providers.
/squaresolidGet due diligence reports.
/squaresolidGet awards.
Richard Wilson: Great, thank you for that advice. What have you learned
not to do, or what have you stopped doing related to trading or operations
that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position as a high-quality fund managementbusiness? Any lessons or tips to share on this point?
Hendrik Klein: I would have to say not selling straddles. We do not take
unlimited risks anymore.Institutionalization and Operations 29
Richard Wilson: Besides AUM, what do you believe is most important for a
hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institutionalizinga hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
Hendrik Klein: I believe that transparency, risk management, and clarity of
investment process are the most important things. Anything you can do
to upgrade the pedigree of the team helps.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on institutionalization and the importance of trans-
parency for hedge fund managers, please type this URL into your Webbrowser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Transparency
Richard Wilson: I completely agree. One of the top three reasons this book
was put together is that I believe hedge fund managers would like to hear
from others on what has helped raise capital, make them more institu-
tional, and improve operations. I think that some hedge fund managers or
traders can feel somewhat alone in the industry and in their plans or chal-lenges. Yet nowadays almost everyone I speak with is trying to upgrade
their team pedigree and the caliber of their operations. This is one of the
most widespread trends in the industry right now—the institutionalizationof trading, risk management, marketing, team pedigree, and investment
processes regardless of assets under management.
SHERI KANESAKA, ASSOCIATE, MICHELMAN
& ROBINSON, LLP
The next interview on institutionalization was with Sheri Kanesaka of
Michelman & Robinson, LLP, a law ﬁrm serving hedge fund managers and
alternative investment professionals. She regularly handles complex, cross-border transactions and counsels on regulatory issues and compliance with
U.S. securities laws and regulations for both private and public offerings.
Richard Wilson: In terms of making a hedge fund more institutional, what
operational changes are you seeing being made?
Sheri Kanesaka: Probably one of the biggest trends right now, prompted
in large part by the Madoff scandal and Ponzi schemes, is to have an30 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
external party do the fund administration such as the month-end investor
reports/letters, analysis on positions, and so on. Prior to this trend, mostof the hedge funds internally did the fund administration and provided
the month-end reports. Now, however, investors want a third party to
provide some oversight by reporting on the funds’ books and records to
make sure that investor monies are being invested in securities, derivatives,
and so on. Most common is a monthly analysis and report.
Richard Wilson: I have seen the same trend. I have even spoken to board
members of hedge funds who are now requiring their funds to use external
administration ﬁrms or they will withdraw their board membership. I
don’t see this trend slowing down anytime soon.
Your ﬁrm works with many large hedge fund managers and asset man-
agement clients. Where do you see many of these ﬁrms investing their
money back into? What could smaller funds learn from this?
Sheri Kanesaka: It is harder in this downturn (2008–2009) to access talent on
all levels; harder to ﬁnd them and retain them as management fees decline.Funds have to be creative in attracting, retaining, and compensating talent
in this more challenging environment.
ERIC WARSHAL, CEO, FUND ASSOCIATES
The next interview was completed with Eric Warshal, CEO of Fund Asso-
ciates, a fund administration ﬁrm based in Atlanta, Georgia. Mr. Warshal
is a seasoned executive manager with over 15 years of operational man-
agement experience. Mr. Warshal spent 12 years with Cox Enterprises(a Fortune 200 company). He held various management positions in the
company, ending his tenure as the director of operational support. Over the
years he held positions of increasing responsibility that included productmanagement, business development, research and development, technology
management, and general operational management and support. His last
position entailed managing the technology support of the 35,000 employeesof Manheim Auctions (a Cox subsidiary). Mr. Warshal holds a bachelor of
science in marketing from the University of Florida and a master of business
administration from Emory’s Goizueta Business School.
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you now see hedge
funds picking up that are a new trend in the industry?
Eric Warshal: Although not entirely a new best practice, as a result of
the scandals that have permeated the news recently, we have noticed
an increase in the demand for cash management services that entail the
administrator acting as a signatory for wire transfers on behalf of the fund.Institutionalization and Operations 31
This is directly reﬂective of the need to provide current and prospective
investors with a level of conﬁdence that the proper checks and balancesare in place which prevent the opportunity for fraudulent activities to
occur. Overall, we have identiﬁed more previously self-administered funds
engaging in the best practice of hiring administrators to provide their
investors and prospective investors with the conﬁdence that an objective
third party is validating their returns.
Richard Wilson: I’m glad you brought up the wire transfer and validation of
returns points, because despite the common recommendation for hedge
fund managers to obtain administration ﬁrm services, the direct reasons
or beneﬁts of doing so are sometimes not stressed enough. Anything elseyou see, any trends related to this advice?
Eric Warshal: We don’t recommend particular investments; however, we
are able to identify trends that occur in the trading of our clients. We
notice that funds that properly utilize leverage seem to grow quicker than
those that don’t. However, it seems to be quite essential that, irrespectiveof what trading strategy they are implementing, they incorporate a hedge
so as to offset their risk. We’ve seen funds that have grown quickly, by
taking a large amount of risk, and we’ve seen them fall just as quickly.
Richard Wilson: I have seen similar things happen to very risky portfolios.
I’ve worked closely on the third-party marketing and capital introduc-
tion/prime brokerage side of the business, and I often see both types of
ﬁrms deny clients service if they are betting more than they are investing.
Nobody wants to be associated with a manager aiming at 30 percent a
month returns.
Everyone talks about the importance of operations, but from your per-
spective where should hedge fund managers be reinvesting their money to
improve their operations?
Eric Warshal: Fund managers are realizing that there are both operational
efﬁciencies and cost efﬁciencies associated with analyzing which opera-
tions can and should be accommodated for in-house and which should be
outsourced. Fund managers can take advantage of consulting ﬁrms who
can fully assess the manager’s operational business and provide quan-tiﬁable justiﬁcation for potential outsourcing of certain operations, such
as technology, back-end ofﬁce management, administration, and so on.
Additionally there exists the added beneﬁt of potentially becoming moreappealing to institutional investors by virtue of properly outsourcing cer-
tain operations—to provide them with the level of comfort, knowing that
certain operations are being handled by experienced professionals.
Richard Wilson: I think that documenting each key process your ﬁrm under-
takes and making sure you have solid reasons for keeping each individual
process in-house is an exercise every fund should walk through. What32 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
operational best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds imple-
menting that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Eric Warshal: Proper due diligence is something that most small hedge funds
tend to bypass, be it because of cost or just the fact that the fund doesn’t
have the overall time/resources to devote to it. However, the $1 billion-
plus hedge funds take their time when deciding where and when to in-
vest, with respect to other fund managers. By engaging in proper due
diligence—that is, assessing the manager, his background, his past perfor-mance, his operations, and so on—they are able to more conﬁdently invest
and decrease their risk factors. However, smaller, less resource-intensive
funds that solely rely upon the experience and intuition of their managersoftentimes only provide cursory levels of due diligence when making some
fund investment decisions.
Richard Wilson: This is a topic that I touch on in detail in Chapter 6.
I interview a family ofﬁce, an institutional consultant, and provide some
tips to managers who are moving through due diligence processes. I believemost professionals now recognize the importance of due diligence, but
allocating the capital and ﬁnding the time will always be the bottleneck
in the industry to actually implementing these best practices.
LANCE BARAKER AND WILLIAM KATTS, SENIOR
MANAGING DIRECTORS, TRADESTATION PRIME
The ﬁnal short interview for this chapter on institutionalization and oper-
ations improvement was with Lance Baraker and William Katts. As seniormanaging directors at TradeStation Prime, they meet and work with more
than 500 hedge fund managers each year. Their experience is in working
with $300 million to $1 billion-plus hedge funds as well as emerging hedgefund managers and start-ups.
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you now see hedge
funds picking up that are a new trend in the industry?
Lance Baraker: There are several areas that a hedge fund needs to set up for
operational best practices.
/squaresolidSince the debacle of 2008 in the ﬁnancial industry, risk managementhas come to the forefront of operational best practices. Hedge fundmanagers cannot access risk in a T +1 format any more.
/squaresolidManagers need to understand the risk proﬁle of their fund and determine
the leverage, liquidity, and market risk. Managers should be offeringInstitutionalization and Operations 33
their institutional investors risk reports on demand and set up at least a
weekly report going through the key risk metrics.
/squaresolidHedge fund managers should also segregate the duties of risk out to
more than one person in their ﬁrm. That way the person picking the
stocks is not the one determining the risk of the fund.
/squaresolidOther key areas in operational best practices include valuation, compli-
ance, disclosure, and business structure.
William Katts: I agree, but I would also like to stress that hedge funds must
have the ability to consolidate multiple asset classes, multiple currencies,
and multiple prime brokers in a single integrated platform in real time.
Portfolio managers must, with a click of the mouse, be able to knowexactly what their real time proﬁt and loss (P&L), risk, and positions are.
This trend is also to have a real-time reporting system that can be accessed
by investors or a third party, moving toward a fully transparent model.The key trend in this market is full transparency.
Richard Wilson: Great advice. Out of the points you mentioned, I believe the
segregation of risk and portfolio management duties is probably the least
common suggestion I have seen actually implemented. This is something
that I believe many $30 million-plus hedge funds could achieve buthaven’t yet.
Everyone talks about the importance of operations, but from your per-
spective, where should hedge fund managers be reinvesting their moneyto improve their operations?
Lance Baraker: Since the Bernie Madoff debacle, transparency is the
buzzword going around the hedge fund industry. Hedge fund managersneed capital to sustain their business, and this capital comes from institu-
tional investors.
/squaresolidThe hedge fund managers who understand their demands will be the
most successful.
/squaresolidRight now daily or weekly transparency is essential.
/squaresolidI would reinvest capital in technology that could produce daily reports.
/squaresolidIn addition, I would either hire a compliance ofﬁcer or outsource this
service to groups in the industry. Managers must have a written com-
pliance manual and have a clear process in place for handling conﬂicts
of interest in the hedge fund.
/squaresolidI would also suggest the manager do a monthly call with investors to
discuss the performance of the fund and thoughts on the strategy.
/squaresolidQualitative discussions are just as important as the quantitative reports.
Richard Wilson: I and several of the hedge fund managers and consultants I
have interviewed strongly agree. You really need to understand your end34 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
client, their concerns, needs, wishes, and constraints, to operate in a way
which is congruent with who they would like to invest in.
If you are a hedge fund manager or trader looking to start a fund, I would
take some notes down on the bullet points listed by Lance Baraker and startcreating a to-do list for your fund. Start with what can be implemented this
week and make sure that it is done in a way that ensures the new processes
or controls will be carried out consistently each week or month.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds
implementing that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Lance Baraker: I don’t think smaller hedge funds are ignoring any best
practices. However, I think the larger hedge funds have the capital tospend on compliance ofﬁcers, risk managers, and technology. Most of the
smaller hedge funds are usually one- or two-man shops that wear many
hats and have money from family and friends. I think the service providerindustry for hedge funds has grown, and you can outsource a tremendous
amount of this to experts in their ﬁeld. You can outsource compliance,
disaster recovery, IT, valuation reporting, and middle- and back-ofﬁce
functions. This would save the smaller hedge fund time and money and
still fulﬁll the best practices methodology it needs to be successful.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on institutional quality improvement opportuni-ties for hedge funds, please type this URL into your Web browser:
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Institutional
Richard Wilson: True. Larger hedge funds can have 10 or 100 times the bud-
get of an emerging hedge fund manager. I think outsourcing your noncore
activities is the right way to go. I recently spoke with a fund manager inBoston at one of our Hedge Fund Premium networking events about this
issue, and he mentioned that they had identiﬁed 18 core processes being
carried out to run their fund. They have decided to outsource 15 of these.
Most funds I know don’t document every process they are carrying out
and do not cleanly outsource them in this type of a strategic fashion. If
you do it right it could have a few layers worth of beneﬁts to investorswho may be interested in examining your operations and what you do or
do not keep in-house.Institutionalization and Operations 35
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on documenting operational hedge fund pro-
cesses, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Operational
William, you have seen hundreds of hedge funds a year now and have
also been a trader for over 20 years. How do you see larger funds operating
in more institutional quality structures and how can small to medium-size
funds beneﬁt from your perspective?
William Katts: Like Lance, I believe that it is not so much that smaller funds
are not aware of what best practices they should be employing. It justcomes down to economics and the amount of actual business they have
to spread to the street.
Two points that do really leap out, though, are (1) the ability to integrate
transparent real-time risk systems and reporting, and (2) the implemen-
tation of true multi-prime functionality. The price to incorporate the risk
systems and reporting can be quite costly versus the expected returns ofthese smaller funds, and to multi-prime gives the larger funds the ability
to move assets between primes and extract more favorable fees than the
smaller funds. This also gives the allocators that feeling of safety across
custodians. We are growing our current business on the fact that many
small to medium-size hedge funds just haven’t historically had the amount
of business to support these two abilities, yet many managers know thatthey are critical to raising capital.
Richard Wilson: What should very quickly growing hedge funds of $100 mil-
lion invest their money in as they grow? What is most important?
William Katts: This may be oversimpliﬁed, but what is most important to a
hedge fund as they grow is investing in talent. This is extremely importantwhen implementing systems. Good systems are only as good as the ability
for them to be functional. The biggest complaint I hear from the bigger
hedge funds is that they are overstaffed with people who perform the samejob. Redundancy can escalate expenses. Also, the proper use of derivatives
can increase alpha and decrease risk. Having an experienced derivatives
trader is paramount—their ability to generate alpha and help a fundmanage risk is one of the key additions when the resources are available.
With the attrition of the trading ﬂoors and the advanced technology in
risk systems, the price for a talented person with proper risk tools becomes36 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
much more cost-effective and an absolute must as a fund walks up the
ladder.
Richard Wilson: Great, thank you both for sharing your insights. Few pro-
fessionals that we interview here work closely with so many different
hedge funds in the industry.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Within this chapter we heard from many professionals who collectively have
well over 100 years of experience within the industry. Here are some quick
tips directly from their transcripts:
/squaresolidTake the long-term view when planning out infrastructure andoperations.
/squaresolidUnderstand your USP; do SWOT analyses (strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats); have superior sales literature and a web
site in place.
/squaresolidInvest in talent and possibly a derivatives trader with risk management
experience.
/squaresolidMost funds are considered institutional when they have over $80 or
$100 million in AUM.
/squaresolidLeverage service providers to gain access to additional real-time report-ing, software, and risk management tools.
/squaresolidDon’t underestimate service providers—they are business partners who
can make or break your business.
/squaresolidCreate transparent processes, risk monitoring, compliance procedures,
and due diligence reports.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: A study by Capco in 2006 shows that more hedge funds
fail due to poor performance and portfolio blow-up than for operational
reasons.
2.Which of the following is not a piece of advice from Stephen Abrahams
on improving hedge fund operations and capital-raising processes?
a.Understand your strengths, weaknesses, and USP.
b.Have better than average marketing materials and sales literature.
c.Employ a third-party marketer or in-house sales professional.
d.Fire your service providers and bring all of your operational work
in-house to make sure everything is done the right way.Institutionalization and Operations 37
3.What AUM levels are typically considered the beginning of what a
mature or institutional-quality ﬁrm would manage?a.Over $25 million AUM.
b.Over $80 or $100 million AUM.
c.Over $250 million AUM.
d.Over $300 million AUM.
4.Hendrik Klein from Da Vinci Invest operates inside a hedge fund hotel.
Which services do hedge fund hotels typically provide?a.Bookkeeping, tax advice, ofﬁce space, IT maintenance.
b.Bookkeeping, tax advice, capital raising, portfolio managers.
c.Bookkeeping, portfolio management software, ofﬁce space, IT main-
tenance.
d.Bookkeeping, tax advice, capital raising, IT maintenance.
5.True or false: Working with the wrong service provider can result in
lost investors for a hedge fund.
6.True or false: Within this chapter we suggest keeping risk and portfolio
management together, as separating the operational powers of these
departments may lead to many problems for a hedge fund business.
7.Since the Madoff case it has become
popular for hedge funds
to use independent fund administration ﬁrms.
a.Less.
b.More.
8.Lance Baraker suggests that monitoring risk within a T +1 format is:
a.Now a best practice and should be available to all hedge fund
managers.
b.Now the industry standard and just now becoming available.
c.Not adequate anymore.
9.Within this chapter it is suggested that or transparency
helps ease investor concerns.
a.Monthly or annual.
b.Weekly or monthly.
c.Daily or weekly.
d.Weekly or quarterly.
10. True or false: William Katts suggests that talent is an overrated resource
that small hedge funds spend too much money on.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 3
Hedge Fund Marketing Pro
There are three ways to raise capital: having more high net worth
friends than the next fund manager, landing early institutional
allocations, or hard work. Get to work.
This chapter provides some basic capital raising and marketing tips, as well
as a case study analysis of Tassini Capital Management, a California-
based hedge fund manager. Tassini Capital Management was attempting to
grow its assets from $39.2 million in assets under management (AUM) to
$250 million in AUM in a three-year period. The case study outlines the
management’s struggles, challenges, lessons learned, and the formula they
found for raising capital from new investors. This chapter provides some
short interviews on capital raising, as well.
Why important : The capital-raising tips, strategies, and case study in-
cluded in this chapter are only available due to lessons learned the hard way,through making mistakes, receiving feedback, and adjusting capital-raising
strategies until they worked. Studying this chapter carefully can save liter-
ally $25,000 or more in consulting fees and, more importantly, double the
rate at which you raise capital. If these lessons and tips are ignored, your
team will likely repeat mistakes that others often make while trying to grow
their AUM.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund marketing, please type this URL intoyour Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Marketing
39The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 40 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BAD NEWS
The bad news is there is no magic bullet to raising capital. I spoke with
at least a dozen managers recently at a Hedge Fund Premium networking
event in Chicago regarding their capital-raising plans. Most were looking
for capital-raising help of some type, and we discussed many roadblocks
that managers are seeing between them and the AUM levels they are trying
to achieve.
Daily action and discipline are the best things that fund managers can do
to raise capital. They must take responsibility for marketing their fund and
have someone reaching out to new investors on a daily basis. If they do not,
they will forever remain in the bottom 20 percent of the industry in termsof assets. Very few funds gain their initial assets through a superpowerful
third-party marketing ﬁrms. Third-party marketers typically like to work
with managers who have some AUM momentum or foundation underneath
them.
To raise capital, managers need to have superior tools and processes to
those of their competitors. This means superior investor cultivation processes
in place, superior investor relationships management, superior marketing
materials, superior outreach efforts, superior e-mail marketing, and superiorfocus on investors who actually have the potential of making an investment.
Each of those topics could be discussed for a whole conference, and all of
these moving parts need to be in place to compete in today’s industry. Whilethis does not mean that managers need to outspend others in marketing,
they do need to strategically plan their marketing campaigns to compete
effectively.
There is a good quote which goes something like, “If you want to
have what others don’t, you have to do what others won’t.” In other
words, translated for hedge fund marketing: If you want to grow assets,you must put in the extra work, planning, and strategy that others skip
over.
Every morning, try to listen to a 45-minute custom MP3 audio ses-
sion of business lessons, marketing tips, and positive thinking notes. One
great quote I hear every morning is connected to an interview Brian Tracyconducts in which a multimillionaire says that success is easy: “You must
decide exactly what it is you want, and then pay the price to get to that
point.”All of this may sound wishy-washy or inexact, but it is importantto realize that there is no single magic bullet for raising capital. It takes
hard work, trial, and a superior effort on all fronts to stand out from your
competition.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 41
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on third-party marketing please type this URL into
your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/3PM
PUBLIC RELATIONS MANAGEMENT
Public relations has to be one of the most ignored marketing tools of hedgefund managers today. The Hedge Fund Group has worked with over three
dozen hedge funds on their marketing plans and capital-raising efforts. So
far, the most intense public relations effort our ﬁrm has seen set forth by asub–$1 billion hedge fund was a single press release over a four-year period.
This is not to say that any hedge fund that is not publishing at least four
press releases per year is doing something wrong. However, many could
beneﬁt by simply making themselves more available to the press.
The media is hungry for real-time opinions of hedge fund managers,
traders, and marketers. They need comments on current market conditions,
trends in hiring and ﬁring of traders and portfolio managers, and what
prospects lie ahead for the industry as a whole.
Many hedge fund managers shy away from contributing to stories in the
press. I would strongly encourage you to speak with your legal counsel and
see if they would approve of your discussions with the media if you stick to
industry trends, general market trends, and long-term movements you are
seeing in the industry.
Top Four Tips for Taking Advantage of Public Relations for Your Hedge
Fund
1.Speak to your legal counsel to check on exactly what you can or cannot
say to the press.
2.Develop a list of 10 to 15 targeted publications that you would like to
appear in. Identify the editors of ﬁnancial columns in those publicationsor news sources and introduce yourself to them as a resource.
3.Speak at public events, conferences, networking events, and other places
in the industry where you will be heard not only by others in the industry
but probably by a few members of the press as well.
4.Consider writing a book on your insights and experience. Many profes-
sionals in the hedge fund industry are often interviewed on TV after they42 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
have published a book on a speciﬁc topic in the hedge fund industry,
such as regulation or quantitative trading. Yes, writing a book soundsextreme to many who are already working 50 hours a week, but that is
also why it would be so effective to consider doing so. Those with the
time and skills to write well are often not the same ones who have the
experience and insight to write something unique and valuable.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on public relations strategies for hedge funds, pleasetype this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/PR
EDUCATIONAL MARKETING
One of the most effective ways you can market your hedge fund is by beingfour times more educational and easy to understand than your competition.
I wrote in my blog last year that a recent survey had shown that over 78 per-
cent of institutional investors will not invest in something that they cannotunderstand. I would imagine that for high net worth (HNW) investors this
ﬁgure is even higher.
While some managers purposely position their fund to appear “black
box” and top secret, there are opportunities to market hedge funds which are
open, transparent, and simple in explaining the fund’s investment process
and risk management tools. This does not mean ignoring advanced methodsor models of trading and managing portfolios, but it would require more
of a 10,000-foot-view and explanation of the investment process instead of
the 500-foot-views that are so often used. The trick in doing this right is to
balance providing enough detail and real meat that an institutional investor
or consultant will gain some granularity, while not completely overwhelmingHNW investors or wealth managers who may be less versed in common
hedge fund strategies of portfolio management techniques.
Here is a list of four additional ways you may market your hedge fund
in a more educational or simple way:
1.PowerPoint. Dedicate 20 percent of the PowerPoint presentation to
educational content. Asterisk all industry terms and note that deﬁnitions
are provided in the back of the presentation. Explain the investmentHedge Fund Marketing Pro 43
process so that anyone could understand, at least on a high level, how
your fund operates. Start with the team, high-level investment process,and how that all comes together before digging into trading examples
or risk management tools.
2.Folder. Many managers use a folder of marketing materials while meet-
ing with clients. This often includes a one pager, a PowerPoint presen-
tation, and a recent quarterly market outlook newsletter written by the
portfolio manager. It is wise to always include some additional readingin the folder as well. Provide two to three white papers written by ex-
perts outside of the ﬁrm that speak to the trends related to the assets
that your ﬁrm invests in or strategies your ﬁrm employs.
3.Speaking and writing. Speaking at wealth management conferences and
HNW-related events can be highly effective. The easily overlooked as-
pect here is audience: Are there more competitors or potential investors
at the events you speak at?
4.Wealth management and ﬁnancial planners. Some of the most ignored
sources of capital for hedge fund managers are small to medium-size
wealth management ﬁrms and ﬁnancial planning groups that serve
HNW professionals from time to time but don’t manage $1 billion-plusin total assets. Many of these groups work as part of a broker-dealer
network or RIA, and they may only meet in person with 5 to 10 hedge
funds in any one year, whereas larger institutions may meet with several
each week. These relationships take a long time to build into effective
sources of capital, but if they are approached in a more educational
fashion than your institutional leads, they can pay off as very stickylong-term accounts.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on educational marketing strategies for rais-ing capital, please type this URL Into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Educational
FORGET ABOUT CONTACTING MORE INVESTORS
Yes, it may seem illogical to forget about contacting new investors whileattempting to raise capital, but this may be what you need to do to meet
your business goals. Many of the hedge fund managers I speak to want to44 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
be connected with investors; they want lists of family ofﬁces, seed capital
providers, or HNW wealth management ﬁrms. While accessing more in-vestor contact details may be a useful resource and improve your marketing
efforts, it is often not the real constraint that is holding your business back.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on called “What Is a Family Ofﬁce?” please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Family-
Ofﬁce
No business is perfect; every business has some constraint that, if re-
moved, would help the business more than anything else. Sometimes this
constraint is portfolio management expertise, sometimes it is marketing ma-terials, and many times it is lack of institutionalized processes and tools.
Seldom do I meet with hedge funds which, if provided with a long list of
1,000 investors, would explode in assets under management.
Most hedge funds do not take the time to write down all of their current
business problems or symptoms and ask four “why” questions to identify
the root constraint in their business model. A good tool that I have seen usedby half a dozen management consulting gurus is the “Four Why Process.”
If you ask why something is happening four times, you will often get to the
root cause of the problem. Here’s an example of how the process is used:
/squaresolidInitial problem/symptom : We don’t manage $100 million in assets
yet. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : We are not raising capital
from wealth management ﬁrms as you had hoped. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : Our marketing materials have
not been brought up to speed with the competition’s—they are light andour investment process is poorly described. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : We know that you should
be paying a consultant or in-house marketer to help with both mar-keting materials and generating relationships, but you have not hired
one. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer : We do not have the proﬁts available to hire a full-time
marketer, but we can get around to creating a system to share equity,
grow relationships with third-party marketers, or build a marketing-
related advisory board.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 45
The point of this exercise is to identify what the bottleneck is that is
slowing down your growth. If a hedge fund can be seen as a 20-link chain,you must have all 20 strong links in place to keep the business growing
long-term. If 19 links can carry the weight of a $300 million fund but one
link is only up to par for a $10 million fund, then you will limit your growth
and may never reach or only very slowly grow into a $300 million fund. The
biggest return for your investment of time and money will be to focus on
ﬁxing that one broken or subpar link in your operations, marketing, trading,or internal business processes. Anything else would be a relative waste of
money or energy.
This is a unique marketing technique because it is a reminder that the
smartest thing you could do for your marketing and sales campaign may have
nothing to do with picking up a phone or buying a database of investors.
Before spending more money or valuable time, consider the following two
tips for improving your ability to attract investors:
1.Use the “Four Why Tool” to drill down deeper into the top ﬁve prob-
lems that you see your fund facing right now. Oftentimes three to ﬁve
problems will be symptoms of a single root cause which can be directly
addressed.
2.Ask others, including your advisory board, current investors, potential
investors and co-workers, what is holding your fund back. Do not set-
tle with two-word surface answers. Try to identify what three to ﬁveaction steps your fund could take this quarter to improve how you are
positioned and address the number one limiting factor in your business.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video called “What Is Holding Your Hedge FundBack?” please type this URL into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Holding
E-MAIL MARKETING BEST PRACTICES
I worked as a risk consultant and capital raiser for seven years before starting
my own ﬁrm. During the last few years of those positions, I was responsible
for raising most assets on an e-mail and phone-based system, and I have46 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
slowly picked up some tips for capital raising since then. Our business is so
e-mail-based (800,000 messages in two years) that we have been forced tostudy best practices in this space to improve our efﬁciency at connecting with
potential clients. Here are the e-mail marketing strategies we have picked up
the hard way over the past few years.
Most CEOs don’t invest their time or put much importance on man-
aging e-mail communications. If you invest your time in increasing your
effectiveness at e-mail marketing you will have an edge over others.
E-Mail Marketing Best Practices
1.Understanding importance of copy . What is the difference between a
$1 bill and a $100 bill? The message on the paper. The message on your
e-mail, the message on your investor letters, the message on everything
you write makes the difference between its being worth $1,000 and
$100,000. I think that sales copy writing is consistently undervalued
and overlooked by business and investment professionals of all types.One of the best tips I can provide for e-mail marketing would be simply
not to overlook the power of a carefully constructed e-mail marketing
campaign or well-written piece of communication.
2.Use the professional’s ﬁrst name in the subject of e-mails to them .
Marketing Sherpa 2008 study showed this practice increased open rates
by 30 percent; using both the ﬁrst and last name increased open ratesby 22 percent.
3.Focus on the headline . The most important part of any piece of copy
is the headline. Oftentimes over e-mail the headline of the e-mail isa slight variation of the subject line, perhaps the subject line minus
the person’s ﬁrst name. Focus on ﬁtting a beneﬁt and then the chain re-
action of that beneﬁt into the headline if possible: “Double Your CapitalRaising Resources to Cultivate More Investors Each Day.” We have
found that putting the beneﬁt after your ﬁrm name is most effective.
Just be careful not to promise beneﬁts that are at odds with your com-
pliance department or the core of what you are really offering.
4.Focus on the start . Hook the reader in the ﬁrst paragraph. Make sure
the ﬁrst paragraph is no longer than two sentences and provides a very
concise summary as to what will be discussed in the following message.
If possible, try to ﬁt in both what the beneﬁts will be of hearing thisinformation and what the dangers are of not paying attention to it.
Psychological studies consistently show that professionals are almost
twice as likely to listen more closely and take action on informationrelated to a fear or some negative result than on some potential beneﬁt
or positive outcome. This does not mean you should scare clients into
working with you, but you should hook readers by using framing , whichHedge Fund Marketing Pro 47
mentions the positive results as well as the negative consequences of not
taking action. The recent use of e-mail browsers that let you preview theﬁrst 50 to 150 words of e-mail messages makes the start of your e-mail
even more important.
5.Use professional e-mail distribution services . Use a professional e-mail
distribution service such as AWeber. This costs $10/month or less to
start using. By using this service your e-mails will be delivered more
often, your campaigns will be more organized, and the service will morethan pay for itself through saving you valuable time. Make sure that
whatever service you use, you consider opt-in conﬁrmation and enable
an unsubscribe link at the bottom of each e-mail you send.
6.Automate relationship development . Use automated follow-up e-mails.
Write a series of 20 educational e-mails covering industry white pa-
pers, industry ﬁndings, commonly misunderstood terms, and informa-
tion about your fund. Once you have qualiﬁed an investor, ask for their
permission to opt into an e-mail list which will automatically send themthese professional papers once a month for the next 20 months. If you
deliver value in each of these 20 e-mails, your further inquiries will be
well received. We currently use Aweber to send out automated e-mailsto over 50,000 professionals each month.
7.Use stories . Whenever you are writing an e-mail or sales letter, try to
incorporate a story of some type. How was this product created? How
did your career and experience evolve and bring you to this point where
you have gained this knowledge? If you read the early part of this chapter
you will see that I have a short story about my own experience withe-mail marketing which led me to write this chapter. This helps create a
frame of reference for the reader and can be helpful in many cases.
8.Include a picture and signature . End your communication with a picture
of the professional on the team who is held out as the communicator or
leader. Make sure that a real scanned signature and professional picture
are included to help readers connect with your team.
Our team provides over 1,600 hedge funds a year with capital-raising
advice, resources, and products. Our team has helped raise hundreds of
millions of dollars in capital as well. Through these two sources of experiencewe see many of the same fund marketing mistakes made over and over again.
If you can avoid these mistakes, you will be more effective than 80 percent
of your competitors in the marketplace.
Top 10 Fund Marketing Mistakes
1.You have a three-month capital raising goal. This is unrealistic and the
wrong mind-set to go out of the gate with. You need to plan, build48 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
relationships, educate potential clients, and design high-quality market-
ing strategies and materials for the long term. It takes time to raise lotsof capital, and usually the more valuable the investor, the longer the
sales cycle. Don’t try to cram everything into a one- to three-month
capital raise.
2.You’re counting on simply building a track record and then hoping to
outsource all marketing to a great third-party marketing ﬁrm down the
road. This puts all of your eggs into the third-party marketing basket.Third-party marketers have hundreds of potential clients approaching
them each year. It is risky to assume one will not only take you on as a
client but actually raise a sustainable level of capital for you.
3.You’re spending $8,000 on graphic design and web site design but
$0 on hiring someone who is an expert at constructing sales letters,
writing copy, and creating effective headlines and taglines for your po-
sitioning in the marketplace. Many times I see fund managers who want
to look very professional but there is no meat in what they are saying,no hook to draw in the reader.
4.Not dedicating resources to capital raising is the most obvious mistake
that I see in the industry. Many fund managers will act as the CIO,make two to three phone calls a week or sometimes per month, and
then wonder why they have not raised more capital. Performance does
notmarket itself, pedigree does notswing all doors wide open. You need
to have dedicated resources, an internal marketing resource working at
least 20 hours/week, investor databases so you can spend your time
calling on real prospects instead of always having to qualify them, and agrowing internal customer relationship management (CRM) or investor
relationship management (IRM) system in place to track the results of
your investment in investor relationships.
5.You speak at conferences full of your closest competitors instead of your
highest-value potential investors.
6.You underestimate the value of a ﬁrst-name-basis relationship with your
top investor prospects. Some professionals, especially those with tech-
nical backgrounds, think that marketing is a numbers game. Yes, yousometimes have to reach out to many to develop relationships with few,
but relationships are at the core of everything that gets done. Like Jeffrey
Gitomer says, “All things equal, people like to do business with friends;all things being unequal, people still like to do business with friends.”
7.Another mistake I see in the hedge fund space is a lack of capital-raising
training or fund-marketing instruction. You do not have to pay to haveyour marketing staff trained, but at the very least you should document
your own best practices, processes, and investor pipeline developmentHedge Fund Marketing Pro 49
plans, so they can be easily communicated to team members and board
members and then constantly improved each quarter.
8.You miss the boat on authority positioning, educational forms of mar-
keting, and improving your own pedigree standing within the industry.
9.You write off PR. Most managers shy away from or completely ignore
public relations as an avenue for helping create interest and positioning
for experts on their team. Many funds have now successfully employed
the media to spread messages about their fund.
10. A mistake that I see more than 90 percent of funds doing today is using
a boring, run-of-the-mill unique selling proposition (USP) or, worse yet,
not having one at all.
COPY WRITING
Copy writing is the use of words to promote a person, business, opinion,
or idea.
Copy writing is the most undervalued and overlooked tool that a
marketer or sales professional can develop. Many professionals value cold-
calling skills, networking, branding, or public relations skills but I think that
copy writing skills are the most valuable.
Top Five Reasons Copy Writing for Capital Raising Is Important
1.The headline of letters, subject line of e-mails, and ﬁrst few words of
speeches are the most important. Crafting a great headline can takehours to complete, but it will make the difference between being shown
to others and never being noticed.
2.Many hedge funds, family ofﬁces, and private equity groups spend over
$20,000 of their money on their marketing materials every year, yet
95 percent of decisions are based on what’s always been done or what
sounds good instead of A/B testing results to ﬁnd what is effective.
3.Every investment fund markets itself using e-mails and investor letters.
Without copy writing skills you may not only be failing to connect withyour audience but you could actually be turning them off and pushing
clients away.
4.Investment funds of all types are started by successful traders and port-
folio managers; very few are started only by marketers. Due to this
nature of how the business is founded and grown, managers overlook
niche marketing practices such as copy writing or see them as something
beneath them.
5.Ninety-nine percent of your competitors are not using copy writing best
practices.50 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of copy writing for capi-
tal raising, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Copywriting
CASE PROFILE
Fund name Tassini Capital Management
Strategy Long/short
Track record 4 years and 8 months
AUM $39.2 million
Team Brian Tassini, co-portfolio manager
Chris Tassini, co-portfolio manager
John Travis, junior portfolio analyst
Mary Powers, administrative assistant
In the past, Tassini Capital Management has conducted all marketing
efforts in-house, using Chris Tassini’s background in business and marketing
to approach potential investors. Over a period of four years their fund grew
from just $2 million at inception to $39.2 million. Their current AUMproﬁle is made up of family and friends’ money, high net worth accredited
investors, and wealth management ﬁrms. Figure 3.1 is a diagram showing
this breakdown in assets under management.
Family & Friends
HNW Individuals
Wealth Management
Firms$3.1 
$14.2 $22.2 AUM in Millions
FIGURE 3.1 AUM Distribution in Millions, Tassini Capital ManagementHedge Fund Marketing Pro 51
In the past, the team only spent a collective 15 hours a week in marketing
the fund or promoting their brand in the industry. This was carried out byChris Tassini, and most outgoing sales calls were to investors he had met at
conferences or networking events in the industry.
Tassini Capital Management has recently hired a proven third-party
marketing team to help them raise capital from new investors. A third-
party marketer is a professional who independently raises capital for fund
managers on a contractual basis, often raising capital for multiple funds atany given time (learn more at ThirdPartyMarketing.com). The goal is for
Tassini Capital Management to raise a total of $210 million and bring total
AUM up to $250 million in three years.
From the very ﬁrst day of working together, the third-party marketing
team started to make changes to the marketing materials, investor rela-
tionship management systems, investor databases, execution, and processes
followed while raising capital. The ﬁrst change made was to the marketing
materials of the fund. Tassini Capital Management had a new logo devel-oped, its PowerPoint presentation expanded, and one-pager redesigned as
well. A one-pager is a concise overview of a hedge fund’s track record, team,
performance ratios, and relative performance. The most important changeswere made to the PowerPoint presentation, often referred to as a deck or
pitch book in the industry. The advice the third-party marketing ﬁrm gave to
Tassini Capital Management regarding the pitch book included these tips:
/squaresolidMake the competitive advantage clear—make sure that the hedge fundhas a unique selling proposition (USP), not just a selling proposition.
Most funds talk about diversiﬁcation and a unique investment process
or team without much meat or real unique advantage presented.
/squaresolidThere should be three main areas of focus in the PowerPoint presen-
tation: team pedigree and experience, investment process, and risk
controls.
/squaresolidWork with the highest-quality service providers possible so that the funddoes not get scrutinized more than it already will in the normal course
of due diligence.
/squaresolidUse prime brokerage and fund administration business partners to
improve your marketing materials. These two service providers often
provide reporting and risk management aspects which beef up the insti-tutional feel of the organization.
/squaresolidDo not ever let the marketing presentation be longer than 30 pages. Itis challenging enough to get the attention of an investor long enough tothoroughly review a one-page marketing piece on your ﬁrm.
/squaresolidPurchase premium graphics for $2 at iStockphoto.com; develop profes-sional logos for your fund at Design99.com.52 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
/squaresolidUpdate the PowerPoint presentation quarterly with current performance
numbers that have been veriﬁed by the administrator or auditor.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on unique selling propositions (USP), please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/USP
Investor relationship management (IRM) systems were the next thing
that the third-party marketing ﬁrm improved. In the past, Tassini Capital
Management used a Microsoft Word investor tracking system, when onewas used at all. Now they pay a small amount per month for an account
with Salesforce.com, which allows them to track the history of their com-
munications with each investor and, even more importantly, alerts the teamwhen another contact point is needed with a potential investor. It took a
few months for the Tassini Capital Management staff to ﬁgure out how to
use everything in Salesforce.com, but ultimately they found it powerful andﬂexible to adjust as their fund grew.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on investor relationship management (IRM) pleasetype this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
Investor-Relationship-Management
Investor databases are something that Tassini Capital Management had
never used in the past. Through InvestorDatabases.com and with help from
the third-party marketer, they obtained contact details for over 1,000 po-
tential investors and put together a strategic plan for approaching 200 ofthem at any given time.
The method by which Tassini Capital Management was raising capital
in the past was not effective. In addition to not using an IRM system, theteam had somewhat randomly been approaching many different types of
investors, from large European banks to small seed capital providers. The
third-party marketing ﬁrm consulted Chris and Brian Tassini and found thatthey were both unwilling to part with equity ownership in the managementHedge Fund Marketing Pro 53
company of the fund in exchange for capital. They also reviewed past notes
and conﬁrmed that all efforts to work through institutional investment con-sultants had been stalled due to sub–$100 million AUM levels. The result
was a much more focused method of systematically approaching a mix of
investors which included 10 percent institutional investment consultants,
50 percent wealth management ﬁrms, 20 percent multifamily ofﬁces, and
20 percent high net worth individuals. While institutional investment con-
sultants were not going to invest any time soon, they were kept in the mixso that the team could continue to receive valuable institutional feedback
from the consultants.
Despite having hired an experienced third-party marketing ﬁrm for as-
sistance in raising capital, Tassini Capital Management consistently faced
two main challenges while developing relationships with investors. The
ﬁrst challenge was catching the attention of a potential investor. With so
many competitors in the industry offering similar strategies, it was hard to
stand out from the crowd. Convincing a potential investor to engage in a40-minute due diligence call was often in and of itself relatively signiﬁcant.
The second challenge the team faced was the noninstitutional feeling that
potential investors got while looking at their sub–$40 million portfolio andteam of four professionals. The business looked unsteady and unproven to
larger institutional ﬁrms that typically had expectations of $80 to $150 mil-
lion as a very minimum needed before allocations are made.
Over two years of trial and error and receiving advice from other
managers, Tassini Capital Management adjusted its marketing approach in
several ways to meet these challenges. Three changes included:
1.Implementing an institutional-quality multiple-modality marketing ap-
proach including e-mail marketing, conference speeches, article writing,phone calls, and traditional mailings. Each team member had a dif-
ferent role in this marketing approach which supplemented the work
completed by the third-party marketer.
2.Developing prewritten and scripted responses to questions regarding the
institutional quality of the ﬁrm’s trading, technology, risk management,
and investment research processes. This attention to these speciﬁc areas
of operations led to consistent improvements in how they are carried
out. Many of these changes were suggested by free-to-access institutionalinvestment consultants who had been called upon for feedback.
3.Constructing a sense of authority status around the ﬁrm through its
presence in the market. The team members matched this awareness inthe industry with improved branding and marketing materials and tried
to leverage this to meet in person with as many potential investors as
possible. Meeting investors face-to-face allowed them to get past thegatekeeper at many wealth management and family ofﬁce ﬁrms.54 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on systematic capital-raising tips, please type
this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Systematic
STEPHEN ABRAHAMS, VICE PRESIDENT OF
MARKETING FOR A LONDON-BASED HEDGE FUND
For this chapter’s ﬁrst interview, I sat down with Stephen Abrahams, who
raises capital for a London-based boutique hedge fund manager. Here he
shares some lessons and tips on what he has been doing to raise assets for
his fund.
Richard Wilson: What tips could you provide to hedge fund capital raisers
on developing investor relationships?
Stephen Abrahams: Keep in touch on a regular basis, ﬁnd out what they are
looking for, and ask for as much feedback as possible, good or bad. Seeif you can help them in any way, and always verify that you are speaking
with the right person at the ﬁrm.
Richard Wilson: That is good advice. The rule of thumb that I used while
raising capital was to keep in touch with my top prospects by mail,
e-mail, or phone once every 10 days, or about every week and a half.
With lower-priority prospects I would try to keep in touch twice a monthin some way. Do you use a CRM system of some type to manage investor
prospects?
Stephen Abrahams: We do not right now but I think they are a good idea.
Richard Wilson: I have used SalesForce and found it effective, but I have also
used an Excel spreadsheet to simply track investor contact details. I knowmany professionals, though, simply use Outlook’s contact databases, task
manager, and reminder system. How do you track the development of
your sales pipeline? Do you rate investor prospects to keep them in priorityfollow-up order?
Stephen Abrahams: I use an Excel sheet and contact cards along with
Outlook tasks and calendar synched to my iPhone.
Richard Wilson: How many investors is your hedge fund approaching or
calling in any three-month period—400 investors, 50 investors, 1,000
investors?Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 55
Stephen Abrahams: I approach 50 to 100 investors, but it would depend,
as I prefer to research and target more likely prospects rather than use ashotgun approach to cultivating new investors.
PRATIK SHARMA, MANAGING
DIRECTOR, ATYANT CAPITAL
For the next interview in this chapter I met with Pratik Sharma, managing
director of Atyant Capital, who has launched and raised capital for several
hedge funds in the past, learning some lessons and picking up ways of doing
business right along the way.
Richard Wilson: Pratik, can you ﬁrst share what some of your experience
includes?
Pratik Sharma: I’ve launched two funds in the past four years. One is a
long-only, deep-value fund focused on middle-market Indian equities.
The second one is a precious metals focused L/S fund investing in equities,
ETFs, futures, and options. I’ve had to learn foreign regulations fromscratch, learn how to work effectively with offshore service providers,
and do all the marketing and client relations work. I’m not a portfolio
manager, I am a capital raiser with a background in sales and managementconsulting.
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you use to market
your fund to new potential investors? Anything really unique?
Pratik Sharma: It’s pretty standard. We use a standard pitch book/fact sheet.
We are in the process of creating a more dynamic web site that integrates
a blog, performance reports, and all of our social networking efforts.
Richard Wilson: Do you use a CRM system? How do you track important
investor relationships or potential investor contact details?
Pratik Sharma: Yes, we use Salesforce.com to track our investor relationships
and to keep track of important developments over the long term.
Richard Wilson: That’s great. I have used Salesforce as well—it is a tool
that, if used right, I think can really improve the long-term ability to
raise capital even if it does take some extra time to store everything in
the system up front. Does your ﬁrm build organic investor databases orpurchase investor databases from others?
Pratik Sharma: We build our databases organically over time. Our web site
is designed to drive inbound interest and to keep that interest.
Richard Wilson: Some investor databases are not organized for capital rais-
ing and can be a relative waste of time. How long is your typical investor
sales cycle? Eight months? Twelve months? Eighteen months?56 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Pratik Sharma: We are focused on high net worth individuals and family
ofﬁces. When we raise capital from high net worth individuals our salescycle is two to three months.
Richard Wilson: What is the most valuable lesson you have learned while
raising capital over the past few years?
Pratik Sharma: You must have an easy-to-explain and compelling unique
selling proposition.
Richard Wilson: I am so glad you mentioned that, because I think it is
underestimated. To an investor who sees 100 presentations a month,
everyone looks the same, and it is hard to be truly unique and convey that
effectively in a meaningful way. Is there any one book, resource, tactic,or tool that has noticeably increased the ability of your ﬁrm to reach new
investors and raise more capital?
Pratik Sharma: We have found that white papers and webinars are the
most useful tools. They serve as a source of knowledge and insight for
your investors and help to grow the existing relationship. These toolsbuild credibility and demonstrate value even before a formal relationships
starts.
Richard Wilson: That is great. I know that this really works, and our ﬁrm
uses educational materials such as our free e-book on hedge funds for this
same reason. We provide something that beneﬁts our potential clients,
and then when they have a capital-raising or training-related need we can
be ready for them when they need us. I think that your fund is ahead of
90 percent of the hedge funds I speak to in realizing that if they invest
their time and energy into giving away educational content, free training,webinars, resources, and so on, it will come back to them several times
over through greater total and more loyal investors.
What are your top ﬁve tips to hedge fund managers who have less than
$100 million in assets under management but would like to improve the
institutional quality of their fund?
Pratik Sharma: I would suggest investing in your web site. Try to get feedback
from trusted contacts. Have a real USP that isn’t just ﬂuff—then you will
attract more investors than others in the industry.
Richard Wilson: Besides AUM, what do you believe is most important for a
hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institutionalizing
a hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
Pratik Sharma: Risk management istrading. It is the way one really generates
alpha. Also, internal risk management (governance, controls) is key.
Richard Wilson: Agreed. I think that strict, independent governance and
controls are something that will be a must-have in ﬁve years instead of a
nice-to-have, as they seemingly are right now.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 57
Now that your hedge fund has grown a bit and has been around for a
few years what do you wish you had known when you ﬁrst started yourhedge fund? What should every new hedge fund start-up know that you
wish someone had told you?
Pratik Sharma: This business is the best in the world. It is still all about doing
the best for your customers. The arrogance and nonalignment of interests
in hedge funds has been atrocious over the last several years. Investors
aren’t stupid and they aren’t going to put up with it anymore. Embracethat as a differentiator, but recognize that you have to doit and not just
say it.
Richard Wilson: Great to hear that from a marketer. What three tips or
pieces of valuable advice could you lend to emerging hedge fund managers
or new hedge fund start-ups? What valuable lessons have you learned
from starting your fund, trading in the fund, and growing it that others
in similar situations could learn from?
Pratik Sharma: Get good service providers. Size is not necessarily better.
Some good administrators focus on early stage managers. They can be a
tremendous help.
Richard Wilson: I agree. While sometimes the brand or reputation of the
service provider may be important, I do think that there are times when
large service providers leave small hedge fund clients behind in terms of
service.
How long did it take you to launch your fund? About how much did
it cost in total, and what was the most difﬁcult or time-consuming part
about this process?
Pratik Sharma: We formed an offshore fund for India, which took three
months. Regulatory approvals were the most time-consuming part.
Onshore U.S. Limited Partnership (LP) took 30 days. The most difﬁ-cult part is that the manager has to manage the various entities involved.
It is a project, and if you don’t stay on top of all the moving pieces, it will
result in delays and increased expense.
Richard Wilson: Can you share a few mistakes or setbacks you encountered
that were painful and didn’t have to be experienced?
Pratik Sharma: Don’t have a bad or nondescript USP. You will get laughed
out of some ofﬁces.
Richard Wilson: Deﬁnitely worth repeating that point—I agree. What are
the top three resources or tools that you use to run your hedge fund that
are worth more than anything else? What are the most valuable resources
that you could recommend to others?
Pratik Sharma: Salesforce.com and ConstantContact.com are probably two
of the most useful tools.58 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: What is the critical issue that determines whether you work
with a particular consultant, service provider, or marketer? What is theone thing that you always look for? Good service? Recommendations
from others? Branding? Experience?
Pratik Sharma: It is a bit hard to describe. The best way I can articulate
it is “make sure there is a good ﬁt” in terms of experience, in terms of
expectations, and in terms of personalities. These service providers are
extensions of your organization. You want to make sure that you feelcomfortable having them interact with your clients. Your clients will call
them.
Richard Wilson: Exactly. I think that in some businesses you may use a
service provider to get Internet, or to ﬁnd new talent for your team, and
they are truly outside of your organization. In the hedge fund industry,
though, you are really outsourcing large chunks of your operations and
processes to these ﬁrms, so this is an important decision, whether it is a
third-party marketing, prime brokerage, or fund administration ﬁrm.
What is the most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-
month operations? How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What
tools have you found that help you manage this?
Pratik Sharma: The challenge is not to get sidetracked, and to stay focused.
The markets are volatile and you can’t let market volatility and resulting
mood swings get you off track. The way to do it is to set ﬁrm schedules
and to stick to them as much as possible. Plus, raising capital can’t be
done on a drive-by basis. You must deliver value in every interaction to
truly differentiate yourself. Just because you’re ready to take the capitaldoesn’t mean that your potential client is ready to make the allocation.
You can’t really control that. Make sure that you are delivering value, are
seen as trustworthy, and that you have a deﬁnable, unique edge. Whenthe client is ready, he or she will write the ticket.
Richard Wilson: Great advice there. I believe that what you just said there
will be worth more than 10 times the cost of this book to anyone who
is looking to raise more capital for their fund. Over 90 percent of the
hedge funds I speak to are not in a life cycle or track record position toattract a third-party marketer, yet they would like to have an outside party
complete their marketing for them. This is because they barely have time
to do marketing and they are not marketers at heart. What happens isthe portfolio manager or trader puts in three to ﬁve hours a week toward
marketing and, like you said, this becomes a drive-by effort and not much
capital is raised. I truly think that most hedge funds need to develop theirown internal marketing resources, tools, processes, pipelines, and talent.
That is how things ﬁnally get done in the majority of cases I have seen.
Thanks for sharing that bit.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 59
Do you have any other pieces of advice related to operational hedge
fund best practices that you could share with other managers in theindustry?
Pratik Sharma: This business is allabout raising capital. That is not to say
you can’t get anywhere without performance, but what differentiates a
hedge fund from a person trading in his gym shorts is the ability to raise
capital. Invest your time and money accordingly.
HENDRIK KLEIN, CEO, DA VINCI INVEST LTD.
The ﬁnal interview related to fund operations and institutionalization is
with Hendrik Klein, CEO of Da Vinci Invest Ltd., a Zurich-based hedge
fund professional whom I also interviewed for Chapter 2.
Richard Wilson: What have you learned that has enabled your ﬁrm to raise
capital to this point where you are managing a healthy stable level of
assets?
Hendrik Klein: It is challenging. Investors want liquidity, return, and no
risk. Additionally, you should have a Goldman Sachs partner background
with Harvard graduation.
Richard Wilson: I agree that pedigree is very important to investors regard-
less of their location. In the United States, and at least with my experience
in working with UK-based groups, most institutional investors are de-
manding $80 million to $100 million or more in single strategies managed
by fund managers. Is that what you have found as well?
Hendrik Klein: The fund volume should be above $50 million USD mini-
mum, although $100 million USD would not hurt, and a three-year trackrecord. The rest is a numbers game and the discipline to follow up on
every lead in 24 hours.
Richard Wilson: How has your ﬁrm gotten past the “under $100 million, no
institutional-quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smaller
investors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?
Any lessons learned here?
Hendrik Klein: Cooperate with other asset managers, go to family ofﬁces,
smaller funds of funds, and retail investors.
Richard Wilson: How long is your typical investor sales cycle? Eight months?
Twelve months? Eighteen months?
Hendrik Klein: On average, our sales cycle for new investors is eight months.Richard Wilson: What is the most valuable lesson you have learned while
raising capital over the past few years?
Hendrik Klein: Follow up in 24 hours. Keep it simple.60 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: What do you see as your main challenge in raising new
capital for your hedge fund?
Hendrik Klein: Explaining our compelling strategy in a way so that investors
feel comfortable to invest. Getting over the $50 million fund size with
every fund that we offer.
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you use to market
your fund to new potential investors? Anything really unique?
Hendrik Klein: Presentation, DDQ, fact sheet, references, press releases,
articles in magazines.
Richard Wilson: Do you use a CRM system? How do you track important
investor relationships or potential investor contact details?
Hendrik Klein: Yes, we use Salesforce, but we want to switch to Emnis in
2010.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the components of a hedge fund market-
ing system, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Marketing-System
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Tassini Capital Management was making several mistakes that emerging
hedge funds often make. These mistakes included:
/squaresolidNot strategically focusing on certain types of investors.
/squaresolidNot developing a system to track investor pipeline development.
/squaresolidNot developing or communicating an institutional-quality fund businesswhile speaking with investor ﬁrms.
Discovering these ﬂaws, thanks to their relationship with the third-party
marketer, led to several changes. The most important of these included:
/squaresolidUpdating marketing materials.
/squaresolidObtaining investor databases.
/squaresolidFocusing their investor prospects.
/squaresolidCommunicating a clear competitive advantage.
/squaresolidEmploying a multiple-modality marketing and sales approach.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 61
This chapter covers many additional practical capital-raising best prac-
tices, unique positioning techniques being used by hedge funds today, anda hedge fund marketing case study. Here are some key lessons that can be
taken from this chapter:
/squaresolidDevelop a list of 10 to 15 publications you wish your hedge fund would
be featured in and approach them one by one.
/squaresolidWrite for audiences and speak at events full of prime prospects, notcompetitors.
/squaresolidDespite the constant search, there is no person or resource that is a real
shortcut to raising lots of capital for a hedge fund.
/squaresolidTo employ educational marketing, use folders, white papers,PowerPoint presentations, speaking, and writing, and focus on wealth
management and ﬁnancial planner markets.
/squaresolidUse the “Four Why Tool” instead of constantly seeking new investors
or larger investor databases.
/squaresolidThe difference between a $1 bill and $100 bill is the message on the
paper. Don’t underestimate the power of strong sales writing.
/squaresolidSales cycles for hedge fund investors may range from two to threemonths for high net worth investors to eight or more months for insti-tutional investors.
/squaresolidWebinars are a useful tool, and you must have a USP or you will be
ignored.
/squaresolidUse stories and personalized signatures and pictures in your marketing
materials.
/squaresolidAt any one time, target 50 to 150 investor prospects per marketing and
sales team member.
Free Resource : Learn more about hedge fund marketing at
ThirdPartyMarketing.com.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.What percent of institutional investors will not invest unless they
understand the investment being made?a.55
b.44
c.78
d.8862 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.While employing public relations tactics, target publications in
which you would aim to have your hedge fund or principal featured,and begin approaching them.
a.10 to 15
b.20 to 30
c.15 to 25
d.70 to 80
3.True or false: Somewhere around 50 percent of your competitors are
probably ignoring copy writing best practices.
4.Hendrik Klein suggests that investors want liquidity, returns, and
.
a.Tax assistance.
b.No risk.
c.Advice.
5.True or false: Large service providers are always better as they provide
more stable services and a more experienced team of professionals.
6.True or false: The “Four Why Tool” helps determine the real root
cause of a problem so you can directly solve that instead of focusing on
symptoms of a core issue your hedge fund is facing.
7.True or false: Multi-modality marketing material sets means having your
marketing materials translated into at least two different languages each
quarter.
8.The four main focuses of your PowerPoint presentation should be:
a.Team pedigree, returns, transparency, and risk controls.
b.Team pedigree, returns, ﬁnancial controls, and risk controls.
c.Team pedigree, experience, investment process, and risk controls.
9.Do not ever let your PowerPoint presentation reach more than
pages in length.
a.10
b.20
c.30
d.60
10. The most important part of your speeches, e-mails, or sales letter com-
munications are the:
a.Conclusions.
b.Personalized style.
c.Headlines and introductions.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 4
The Shooting Star
The skills that get you out of Egypt are not the same skills that will
bring you to the promised land.
—Joe Polish
This chapter focuses on managers of rapidly growing hedge funds, what
they typically invest in, and what they do to keep the growth of their
fund business moving forward. In this chapter, I touch on marketing tactics,
reinvestment focus, and team building.
Why important : Fast-growing “shooting star” hedge funds have dif-
ferent needs, challenges, and opportunities than emerging hedge funds and
giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds. The advice in this chapter is important be-
cause with consulting rates easily breaking $300/hour for this advice, mostprofessionals do not freely give it away online or at many conferences or
networking events.
18 LESSONS FROM SHOOTING STAR HEDGE FUNDS
Fast growing hedge funds are unlike most large and emerging hedge funds.
These managers have ﬁgured something out and are positioned to grow,
unlike more than 90 percent of the industry. Here are 18 lessons that can
be taken away from some of the fast-growing hedge funds we have worked
with:
1.They take transparency seriously and work to be proactively verytransparent—more so than their competition. They take transparencyinto consideration from the investor’s point of view.
63The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 64 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.They approach multiple investment channels but mostly ignore those
completely out of their reach (for example, they ignore potential pensionfund clients if they are running a $75 million fund).
3.They are always developing relationships and they have dedicated in-
ternal and some external professionals always selling on their behalf.
4.They not only seek pedigree on their team but they are always building
that pedigree through additional research, hiring of expert staff, and
through speaking and writing.
5.They document their operations and make decisions based on what
is best long-term for the organization rather than what is cheaper to
implement today. Like in any business, their ability to plan, strategize,and invest for the long-term forms a competitive edge for them in the
industry.
6.They have risk management and trading plans which are closely fol-
lowed. This helps them improve their actual trading results and provides
conﬁdence to investors since their historical trading actually matches upagainst the decision-making rules of their plans.
7.They know that “risk management,” while sounding less sexy than
“hedge funds,” is the business they are in, and they invest in their ownbusiness accordingly.
8.They have documented, tested, and third-party-veriﬁed ﬁnancial con-
trols, compliance processes, and audits completed at least quarterly,
and these reports are sent at least to board members if not also to
investors.
9.They invest in and improve their infrastructure every year, even if the
pay-off for doing so could be ﬁve to seven years away. Ironically, though,
these are sometimes the investments that pay off the soonest because
investors recognize the type of long-term investment being made.
10. They are experts at completing due diligence processes with institutional
consultants, family ofﬁces, and other types of institutional investors.
They have professionals who are trained for phone-based pitches and
sales, and handoffs during these processes are seamless.
11. Their marketing materials are just as good as those of the $1 billion
hedge funds because after investing $300,000 or more in infrastructure,
talent, research, and risk management, it would be a waste not to spend
$20,000 on presenting it in the right light in a professional manner.
12. They have seen the light that investing in the right areas does produce re-
turns, so they reinvest their money even faster and often more efﬁciently
than even small hedge funds on a tight budget.
13. They invest in training for their employees and board members with
whom they grow longer-term relationships than many emerging hedge
fund managers might.The Shooting Star 65
14. They are not only aware of the competition but they are watch-
ing them—not in terms of what they are investing in so much as what riskmanagement tools, software, trading tools, and USPs they are employing.
15. While hiring, they look for very speciﬁc skill sets and a minimum of
seven years of experience in the industry, unless they have a policy of
grooming from the ground up. Most fast-growing hedge funds I know,
though, like to hire professionals who can hit the ground running and
quickly integrate as part of the team. They actually have an HR depart-ment or at least one person who is head of talent development and
HR-related activities, something almost all small hedge funds lack.
When they are asked on the phone by institutional consultants if theyplan on adding anyone to their team, they have a sophisticated, intelli-
gent answer instead of the generic “We may add an analyst within the
next three quarters.”
16. They understand the “trust by verifying” mind-set of investors, and they
make it easy to verify everything.
17. They conduct more due diligence on business partners, investors, and
potential employees than some retail investors spend on investing in
small emerging managed hedge funds.
18. They realize their success is never going to be built on one software
program, capital-raising process, or investment trend, so they constantly
are working to build their 1,000 blocks of competitive advantage and
ability.
RICK NUMMI, PARTNER AND GENERAL COUNSEL,
ACCOUNTING AND COMPLIANCE
INTERNATIONAL (ACI)
This chapter’s ﬁrst interview is with Rick Nummi of ACI. Rick is a former se-
nior attorney with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) with
expertise in enforcement and regulatory defense and compliance. He is a na-tionally recognized authority in securities law, regulation, and compliance,
and is a featured speaker/educator at multiple industry (NRS, NSCP, NASD,
SEC) trade conferences and presentations. Rick is also an experienced ex-
ecutive with a strong track record of helping registered representatives and
broker-dealers succeed in a highly regulated industry.
Richard Wilson: Rick, ﬁrst off, I know that hundreds of professionals pay
to hear you speak at conferences, so I thank you for spending your time
sharing some knowledge about what fast-growing hedge funds are doing
here today with us.66 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Rick Nummi: My pleasure.
Richard Wilson: The focus of this chapter is a look into what fast-growing
hedge fund managers who are growing assets quickly are doing. What do
they invest in, what do they do differently? How are they growing their
asset size even more? Do you have any unique insights that may not be
mentioned anywhere else in this book related to these questions?
Rick Nummi: One of the things that we have seen is the utilization of the
required annual review and the utilization of compliance reviews andsign-offs. Many times now we bind our annual review with our pedigree
and background and provide it to their clients.
Richard Wilson: That is interesting; I have never heard of that happening
before in the industry. How is this different from what your ﬁrm has
experienced in the past while working with these same hedge fund clients?
Rick Nummi: Typically managers get these reports and sign-offs and hide
them under their desk.
Richard Wilson: What has led to this drastic change?Rick Nummi: Now some of these fast-growing managers are operating on
the assumption that “nobody trusts anybody,” and they take the per-
spective that while they simply do their internal review, they now needsomething more. Doing an internal review is somewhat like a BMW deal-
ership salesman saying the car checks out and looks like it is ready to
sell. These hedge fund managers would now like to show a signed-off
document packet to potential investors.
Richard Wilson: Exactly what types of hedge funds are asking for this extra
step—$1 billion-plus hedge funds? Hedge fund start-ups?
Rick Nummi: The primary differentiator here is that these are hedge fund
managers who understand that you can be proactive with your operations
and compliance and raise more capital by assuming that the general publicand your investors do not trust anyone. The common thread that I ﬁnd
is that these fund managers are the ones who are raising the new capital.
They are not all large or small, but they are effective at knowing what
investors now really want from them.
Richard Wilson: Some fund managers I speak to shy away from institution-
alization type discussions because they are already operating on a tight
budget. Does this type of reporting include any extra costs?
Rick Nummi: No, there are no extra costs, really. It does not cost anything
extra.
Richard Wilson: What happens if in your written report something is ac-
tually found? Then this transparent compliance strategy would backﬁre,wouldn’t it?
Rick Nummi: Potentially, yes, but some of these clients request that problems
are reported early so that they can be rectiﬁed before the report comesThe Shooting Star 67
out. In this way, by the time the report becomes public, the issues have
been addressed and handled.
Richard Wilson: This seems to be in line with the whole trend of institu-
tionalizing your hedge fund regardless of how large it is. Do you see the
institutionalization trend from your perspective?
Rick Nummi: Yes, very much so. The other twist is that the Investment
Advisor Act itself requires self-compliance. The difference between non-
successful clients and successful ones is that the fast-growing, shootingstar funds take proactive steps to go past self-examination and take it to
another level of sophistication and third-party veriﬁcation.
Richard Wilson: Have you actually seen this help increase assets under
management (AUM) for hedge fund managers?
Rick Nummi: Some funds that take these steps have done great during the
recent economic and hedge fund downturn.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other tips related to this proactive ap-
proach to becoming more transparent and then raising more capital be-cause of it?
Rick Nummi: Yes. I often look at the track records and look at the hedge
funds that are not growing and the ones that are really taking off in termsof assets, to see what makes one fund better than another fund. If you are
asked for a risk management process, portfolio construction documenta-
tion, and sign-offs and you can’t produce something in 24 hours, then it
is obvious what type of fund or business you are running. Additionally, if
you have completed all of the sign-offs and documentation yourself, that
also shows evidence that you have not taken it seriously.
Richard Wilson: Great feedback.
Rick Nummi: What is most interesting about this is that many hedge fund
managers will now eventually have to produce this report or sign-off onthe ﬂy. Investors may come in and say, “Before I invest, I want to see a
document saying that this is taken care of and veriﬁed by a third party.”
This means that the cost of the proactive approach is almost exactly the
same as the reactive one, except that there is no upside in being reactive.
When you are reactive you look weak, and you don’t stand out as beingproactive to all of those other investors who do not explicitly ask for this
level of documentation but who may still ﬁnd comfort in it. It may be one
of three things which really set your fund apart.
Traditionally, we have never had to place our pedigree right on our
compliance reports. Lack of pedigree in the reports was an industry stan-
dard, but recently hedge fund managers have been asking me to putin my biography in the ofﬁcial report and review. Now, investors are
judging the fund’s pedigree directly and indirectly through their service
providers.68 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of pedigree and a strong team for
hedge fund managers, please type this URL into your Web browser:http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Pedigree
Richard Wilson: I agree a hundred percent. I think the long-term difference
that steps like this can make could make or break a business in this
competitive industry.
Rick Nummi: We have many clients now come to us and say, “You worked
for the SEC—what should we be taking seriously? What else could we be
doing?”
Richard Wilson: Do you see any other trends in the actions of fast-growing
or large hedge fund managers? These are often the most secretive.
Rick Nummi: We also do due diligence for two of the top ﬁve hedge funds
in the United States. One of the interesting things that occurs when those
funds identify an investment opportunity in another fund is that, absent
a third-party review, those funds do not invest, ever. The institutionalpractices, justiﬁed or not, are being completed at all levels in all silos of
the industry. The big institutional ﬁrms drive the marketplace, and they
will take nothing at face value these days. They want everything complete
and every detail checked at every single turn.
Richard Wilson: What else have you seen happening to fast-growing hedge
funds lately in the industry?
Rick Nummi: The Madoff Effect. This is the client liquidating everything,
taking all of their money out of the fund, and then immediately putting it
back into the fund, just to see if they could do it.
Richard Wilson: That must be a relatively expensive experiment or risk
management check.
Rick Nummi: They typically don’t care if there are withdrawal penalties that
add up to 5 to 10 percent of assets. They just want to know that it can be
done. This is widespread with fast-growing small to medium-size hedgefunds, and this is not slowing down; typically one or two investors per
fund do this each year. When this is done they are really testing whether
the fund can execute what it promises. What is interesting is that our ﬁrmand many ﬁrms like ours can validate this with an independent report for
investors, but they don’t want that—they want a real live check on the
hedge fund manager.The Shooting Star 69
These are smart people investing in hedge funds, and this circles back
to our original point. The hedge fund managers who realize the public’smind-set are the ones who continue to grow at an astronomical rate. If
you don’t understand their gut feeling, you will not be successful. You
could very well be the best stock reader on the planet, but if you don’t
understand the individual investor and what keeps them up at night you
are sunk. Nobody is above scrutiny anymore. It doesn’t matter how many
assets under management you have, either.
Richard Wilson: That is interesting, because typically low AUM tends to be
what holds small and emerging hedge fund managers back from becoming
shooting star or giant hedge funds. While I know that demand and limi-tation have not been lifted, you wonder if this development will actually
level the playing ﬁeld, as some hedge funds do not have these proactive
reports and checks in place and other small funds that have historically
been ignored do. I think this may be an area of real opportunity for those
funds looking to pass the $100 million or $250 million threshold and startworking with more institutional ﬁrms.
Rick Nummi: I think you are correct in that assessment. In every challenge
there is an opportunity.
Richard Wilson: That leads to a question that many hedge fund managers
may be asking themselves when it comes to service provider partnerships.
How do they know who they should hire in this space?
Rick Nummi: We have a tool on our web site which helps fund managers
select compliance and regulation experts to work with. Here is an ex-
cerpt from this resource—16 questions that managers can use when theyinterview prospective service providers:
1.Was your ﬁnancial regulatory experience ...in my type of ﬁrm? Many
compliance consultants attempt to dazzle you with their former reg-
ulatory titles. In many cases, their previous experience wasn’t even in
your type of ﬁrm, or even worse, they have no prior regulatory experi-
ence whatsoever. Make sure your prospective consultant has relevant
experience in your type of ﬁrm.
2.What level of ﬁnancial regulator were you (examiner, branch chief,
associate director, director)? Just as in the ﬁrst question, prior regula-
tory experience as an SEC investment adviser examiner does you nogood if you are a broker-dealer. More importantly, experience as a
former examiner doesn’t give a big-picture view like more senior levels
of regulatory management. Do not hire a ﬁrm without checking forthe level of regulatory management expertise.
3.How long ago were you a ﬁnancial regulator? Many consulting
ﬁrms utilize long retired former regulators. The world has changed70 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
considerably in the past year (just think of the changes over the past 5 to
10 years). Make sure your consultant has recent regulatory experience.
4.When was the last conference you spoke at (that wasn’t hosted by
your ﬁrm)? Many consultants tout their public speaking engagements
as proof of competence. Make sure they let you know if the conference
they spoke at was hosted by their own ﬁrm. Would you rather have an
expert impartial consultant or someone trying to sell you a vacation?
5.When did you get your law degree? With the recent wave of regulatory
changes, more and more consultants are unable to understand the
legalese in which the new rules are written. If you hire a consultant,
shouldn’t he have the professional qualiﬁcations to explain the nuancesof the law? Why wouldn’t you want a consultant who is also a qualiﬁed
lawyer and/or a certiﬁed public accountant (CPA)?
6.How big was the ﬁrm where you were chief compliance ofﬁcer (CCO)?
Again, many consulting ﬁrms have so-called experts who have never
held senior positions at ﬁnancial ﬁrms. Wouldn’t it be nice to havesomeone who has walked in your shoes and understands your issues?
7.What certiﬁcations do you hold as an auditor or examiner? Your con-
sulting ﬁrm should be required to have staff that is just as qualiﬁed asyou are. Being an auditor or an examiner requires specialized training.
Ask them what professional designations they hold that qualify them
to do the work you require.
8.How many active ﬁnancial industry licenses does your staff hold? Your
consultant should have, at the very least, the same licenses you do. Ask
them what they are and when they got them.
9.How much ﬁnance or accounting experience do you have? A consul-
tant should be appropriately experienced in his/her ﬁeld. Ask them
how much experience they have, when, and who for. Hyperbole suchas “120 years of experience” or “We have been around the longest”
is meaningless if the company was bought or sold and/or key person-
nel have left. The better question is: “How much experience do you
have?”
10. What publications have quoted you on compliance topics? Your con-
sultant should be just as comfortable being quoted in the Washington
Post or on CNBC as discussing the same issue with you. Most major
media personnel understand the concept of credibility and why it isabsolutely necessary before quoting someone. Ask your prospective
consultant for their quotes. Most are justiﬁably proud of their appear-
ances in the media. Conversely, if they have never been quoted, youmay wonder why not.
11. Do you write your own procedures manuals and, if so, why? A con-
sulting ﬁrm should be consulting, not creating products for sale. YourThe Shooting Star 71
ﬁrm is charged by law with crafting and editing procedures manuals.
Every regulatory examiner can spot a canned boilerplate manual.
12. How many fully qualiﬁed (in all areas: Investment Advisor, Broker-
Dealer, hedge fund, banking) consultants do you have? Many ﬁrms
have consultants who are fully versed in only one area of the ﬁnancial
industry. Wouldn’t you prefer a fully versed consultant, experienced
and licensed across all relevant areas? Only through broad experience
can a consultant assist you with ﬁtting the disparate pieces together.Don’t settle for less.
13. At how many legal proceedings have you testiﬁed as an expert witness?
The legal system understands qualiﬁcations even better than you do.You must be certiﬁed as an expert in your ﬁeld prior to the forum
accepting your testimony. A good consultant will have testiﬁed (and
been certiﬁed) many times. Ask them about the last time they testiﬁed.
14. Precisely how many of each of these have you personally examined:
Broker-Dealer, Investment Advisor, hedge fund, bank? Make sure you
get the consultant’s scorecard. It is how consultants rate each other. It
is also how you evaluate the depth of experience of your prospective
consultant. An answer of 3-1-0-0 is not very comforting.
15. How many existing (i.e., paid you in the past six months) clients do
you have? Many consulting ﬁrms advertise a large number of clients.
However, just like in the ﬁnancial services industry, things change. The
more relevant question is “How many paid you last year?” You are
required to carefully evaluate advertising. Choosing a consulting ﬁrm
requires the same diligence to avoid exaggerated claims.
16. Are you the consultant that will be assisting me? Many ﬁrms will
discuss all of the preceding questions generically—that is, “We have
99 lawyers, 4,000 clients, 55 CPAs,” and so on. You want to knowwhether the 99 lawyers will all be assisting you. Actually, what you re-
ally want to know is, “What qualiﬁcations does myconsultant have?”
Also be wary of the bait and switch, or “We use a team approach,”
which translates to “We sold you X and we are giving you Y.” The
hiring of a consultant is an important decision. You should meet them,question them, and make sure the ﬁt is good before agreeing to a long-
term commitment.
Richard Wilson: Great questions to ask. Many of these questions could be
rephrased to help fund managers hire other types of service providers and
partners as well, so I will make sure and keep this in the main sectionof the book and not demote it to an appendix where it may be missed.
Thank you for your time today, Rick.
Rick Nummi: Thank you for the opportunity, Richard.72 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
THOMAS POWELL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
ELP CAPITAL
The next interview in this section on shooting star hedge funds is with
Thomas Powell, chief executive ofﬁcer of ELP Capital, a Nevada-based
hedge fund. As chief strategist, Mr. Powell has combined his education andexperience in commercial and retail banking, mortgage banking, real estate
development, and corporate ﬁnance and governance to successfully lead
the company through several periods of market growth and contraction.Mr. Powell also serves as the company’s chief investment ofﬁcer, helping
to identify and structure investment vehicles creating solid investment op-
tions for ELP Capital Advisors’ family of funds, institutional investors, andindividual project investors.
Richard Wilson: What should very quickly growing hedge funds of $100 mil-
lion invest their money in as they grow? What is most important?
Tom Powell: I believe there is nothing that dictates a company’s success more
than the quality of the individuals who make up its team. Investing in and
attracting quality employees will continue to pay dividends throughout acompany’s life span.
Richard Wilson: I agree that pedigree and team are very important. In many
capital market vehicles, whether it be private equity, hedge funds, venturecapital, or angel investing, the team is the element that investors focus
on most when deciding whether to get involved. Today’s hedge fund
industry has developed to the point where many managers can increase
their team pedigree by hiring an outsourced CCO, building a strong board
of advisers, or choosing authority service providers. There are many ways
to grow a team.
Where do you see hedge funds slowing down their own growth due to
lack of resources or skills? What mistakes do you see being made by very
fast-growing $100 million-plus funds?
Tom Powell: Quality hedge funds are slowing down their growth in order
to strengthen their systems and structures. Doing so enables successful
funds to be highly efﬁcient and helps them to prepare for the future.
Putting priority on systems and structures can keep hedge funds operating
consistently no matter how volatile market conditions may become.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see either shooting star hedge
funds or giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds implementing that almost all
small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Tom Powell: Big hedgers talk equally of both long- and short-term goals
and strategies. Small funds are more centered around their short-termThe Shooting Star 73
strategies and they communicate those targets. Such a short-term focus
inevitably comes across in a fund’s identity, and its managers lose focuson larger goals. The bigger funds, at least the successful ones, are able to
think and act on a more global level.
Richard Wilson: This goes hand in hand with what we hear from Rick
Nummi of ACI, that you have to speak with the same language and mind-
set as your investors. I believe that even if most institutional investors
are sensitive to short-term volatility, they also have long-term investmenthorizons and global perspectives.
What insights do you have on the operational best practices or issues of
these shooting star hedge funds like your own?
Tom Powell: Investors are now demanding that hedge fund ﬁrms be trans-
parent. These difﬁcult times have investors completing more prudent due
diligence. In order to remain competitive in the marketplace, hedge fund
managers have to be compliant and open with their processes. Trans-
parency is by no means a new practice, but it has certainly gained im-portance in the minds of investors. Many hedge funds are employing
name-brand, top-notch rating agencies to help highlight their dedication
to being transparent.
Richard Wilson: I have heard from professionals of every type of hedge fund
regarding the importance of transparency. This is obviously a hot button
right now with investors. I want to acknowledge that while this advice is
repeated in this text, I am not going to edit that out—I want to make sure
its importance is not overlooked.
Everyone talks about the importance of institutional quality operations,
but from your perspective, where should fast-growing hedge fund man-
agers be reinvesting their money to improve their operations?
Thomas Powell: Without a doubt, hedge fund managers should be placing an
emphasis on strengthening their systems and structures. This recession has
badly shaken the investment world and now is the time to be building for
(and adapting to) the future. Hedge fund managers must choose to either
build the systems and structures internally or outsource the responsibility.
Either way, they have to be operational and highly efﬁcient. A fund canbe producing phenomenal returns, and sales can be bringing in capital
hand-over-ﬁst, but without efﬁciency your customers will lose their trust
and take their money elsewhere.
Richard Wilson: Great advice. Systems and structures of high-quality oper-
ations are as important to a fast-growing hedge fund as they are to any
fast-growing business, yet small to medium-size hedge funds that I havespoken with rarely use ﬂow charts, project managers, or hire operational
consultants to streamline activities.74 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Within this chapter on fast-growing hedge funds I interviewed experts who
offer some advice, trends, and tips on what some of these fast-growing
hedge funds are doing that may be different from both emerging hedge fund
managers and giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds. Some key lessons from this
chapter include the following:
/squaresolidSome hedge funds are now asking for the pedigree of the service provider
to be attached to every report, analysis, and sign-off, to assure investors
that it is being completed by experts in the ﬁeld.
/squaresolidRick Nummi suggests that the hedge funds he knows that are quickly
gaining assets are those which realize that at some level “nobody trusts
anybody.” You must keep that in mind while making decisions oninfrastructure, reporting, service provider selection, transparency, liq-
uidity, and things like lock-up periods and gating clauses.
/squaresolidFast-growing hedge funds are prepared for and very responsive to in-
vestor demands for compliance or risk-reporting documentation.
/squaresolidTalent is what one Nevada hedge fund CEO suggests as the most com-mon element of a fast-growing hedge fund.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.Thomas Powell of ELP Capital believes that while returns and marketing
are important, without you will lose the trust of investors and
fail as a business.
a.A high pedigree team
b.A web site
c.Corporate quality real estate
d.Operational efﬁciency
2.True or false: Recently transparency has become less important, because
after Madoff most of the large frauds in the industry have been quicklyuncovered.
3.One key difference between fast-growing and successful hedge funds
and those that have not raised much capital is that the fast-growinghedge funds focus more on the
goals and less on the
goals.a.Long-term, short-term.
b.Short-term, long-term.
c.Capital-raising, operational.
d.Capital-raising, compliance.The Shooting Star 75
4.Investors reward those hedge funds with proactively with
respect to capital allocations.a.Aggressive capital-raising strategies.
b.Fast-growing teams.
c.Transparent operations.
5.Rick Nummi suggests that those hedge fund managers who understand
will grow at an astronomical rate compared to others
with similar opportunities.a.The political nature of investments.
b.The mind-sets of investors.
c.The laws preventing certain types of investments.
d.The taxes that affect hedge fund investments.
6.What is referred to as the Madoff Effect within this chapter is the
practice of investors:
a.Demanding quarterly fraud checks.
b.Completely liquidating their assets within the fund.
c.Asking for hedge funds to start using independent administration
ﬁrms.
d.Requiring most hedge funds to have an in-house chief compliance
ofﬁcer.
7.Many hedge funds try to be too
to investor demands when
really they could have an edge and improve their whole business bybeing more
.
a.Large to meet, small business-like.
b.Reactive, aggressive.
c.Reactive, proactive.
d.Aggressive in raising capital and working, patient.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 5
Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru
I hated every minute of training, but I said, “Don’t quit. Suffer
now and live the rest of your life as a champion.”
—Muhammad Ali
Thousands of hedge funds are started each year, but not all survive. Many
start-ups are stopped in their tracks before they ever begin trading the
portfolio. This chapter provides some hedge fund start-up-related tips as well
as interviews with hedge fund start-ups that have survived and succeeded
in hiring, raising capital, and operating for several years. In this chapter
managers share lessons they have learned, what they wish others had told
them before launching, and their top tips for emerging hedge fund managers.
Why important: Over 1,000 hedge funds are launched each year. Despite
this high level of competition, most hedge funds repeat the same mistakes as
they launch their businesses. This is not necessarily the fault of the hedge fund
manager, because information on starting a fund is sparse and often only
provided by ﬁrms with a strong vested interest in directing your hard-earned
dollars toward their bank accounts. Through this chapter you will be able
to quickly pick up valuable lessons from those who have started and grown
their hedge funds, and worked with thousands of fund manager start-ups.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on wow to start a hedge fund, please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Start-A-
Hedge-Fund
77The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 78 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
TOP FIVE TIPS FOR STARTING A HEDGE FUND
I recently completed a consulting engagement with a group of professionals
who wanted my most concise tips on how they should launch and start their
hedge fund, what they should focus on, and what expectations they should
have. Here are some of my pieces of advice to them.
1.Starting a hedge fund is not a get-rich-quick scheme. In 90 percent of the
cases our ﬁrm has witnessed, it takes at least three to ﬁve years before
the hedge fund becomes proﬁtable and stable as a business. I’ve worked
with a client in the past who had been running a fund for seven yearsand still had not raised enough capital to be self-sustaining.
2.Always complete due diligence on your service providers. I know of a
hedge fund manager who, in 2009, was given a quote of more than
$80,000 for some very simple legal formation costs, which is at least
$35,000 above what most other ﬁrms charge for this same service. If newhedge funds do not shop around, they could end up paying twice as much
to service providers as they need to. No, hedge fund start-ups should
not select service providers based on price—but they should always sitdown or have conference calls with at least three prime brokerage ﬁrms,
three auditors, and three administration ﬁrms before deciding who to
work with.
3.Always be growing relationships. This is not the same as “always be
selling.” Selling can be spotted from ﬁve suits away at a networking
event, and felt in how someone asks what company you work for andwhat your role is there. It is always best to take the high road, the long-
term approach, yet always be looking for those individuals whom you
should invest a signiﬁcant portion of your time getting to know. Thebeneﬁts of doing so could be valuable advice, leads, or an allocation. If
you are always looking too closely, then no professionals along the way
will want to give you feedback on your marketing materials or suggest
an alternative path to raising assets.
4.Focus on risk management and the investment process more than on
high performance returns. Yes, investors want to see strong returns,
but a top-ﬁve sign of a green hedge fund manager is someone who
constantly pushes his extremely high returns found in back-testing orhis ﬁrst four months of operating. Doing so ruins your chance of serious
consideration as it gives off the impression that your fund will reach
for those returns at any cost or risk. Speaking about returns too muchdetracts from conﬁdence in your fund’s investment process and risk
management controls.
5.Invest in yourself. Choose high-quality service providers. Build a team.
Break down your investment process into concrete steps, and spendHedge Fund Start-Up Guru 79
50 hours creating a solid PowerPoint presentation/pitch book for your
fund. Don’t show it to a single investor until you have completed ﬁvedrafts of it. Too many times I see hedge fund managers looking to raise
capital who have not yet taken the time to organize their own thoughts,
plans, or marketing materials. If your hedge fund is not worth your
own investment of time, why should anyone else invest their time and
possibly capital into it? Investors look for signs of a manager having
skin in the game in multiple ways.
Most hedge fund start-ups I speak with want referrals to respected ser-
vice providers or advice on attracting seed capital. Almost none have a
business plan for their hedge fund and only a few have PowerPoint presen-tations explaining their investment strategy. If you are a fund manager in
this position, that doesn’t mean you have done anything wrong, but you
may consider writing both a hedge fund business plan and a comprehen-
sive 15- to 25-page PowerPoint presentation now to make it easier to work
with service providers, third-party marketers, institutional consultants, and
potential investors.
Your hedge fund business plan should include information about the
following:
/squaresolidManagement. What team members are required to run the fund effec-
tively? What is the chain of command? How are decisions made? What
happens if two or three professionals disappear tomorrow? Who would
take over responsibilities and what would happen to your investors’funds? The importance of a well-constructed and well-managed team
cannot be overstated.
/squaresolidInvestment process and risk management. Managing risk is what run-
ning a hedge fund is all about. Meet with your prime brokerage ﬁrm’s
risk advisory division, speak with your traders and portfolio managers,
and network with other managers to pick up some best practices in this
space. At the end of the day, your risk management approach, invest-
ment process, and team must be molded into one cohesive group all
pointed in the right direction. There is no magic bullet to raising assets
or gaining seed capital, but getting this combination right is the most
important thing you can focus on.
/squaresolidService providers. Who are you going to use as your prime brokerage
ﬁrm, fund administrator, auditor, or third-party marketer? How
will this evolve as your fund passes the $100 million and $300 mil-lion marks? Will you use multi–prime brokerage services? Capital
introduction teams? Multiple third-party marketers? Your choice of
ﬁrms in this space can affect the levels of assets you manage, the qualityof advice you receive, and the reputation of your ﬁrm as a whole. My80 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
advice would be to meet and interview at least three service providers
of each type in person or over several phone calls, and go with one thatis well experienced yet not so large that your sub–$1 billion account is
an annoyance to them.
/squaresolidInfrastructure and technology. Meet with other local hedge fund man-
agers, your trader, your prime brokerage ﬁrm, and other service
providers to nail down exactly what you will need in terms of reporting,
processing, and functioning not only as a hedge fund but as a small busi-ness. When you start a hedge fund you become an entrepreneur, and
you have to face all of the challenges that accompany that distinction in
addition to those challenges found in managing your portfolio. Manyfunds underestimate the costs of some of the technology needed to op-
erate as they grow beyond the simple $1 to $5 million fund operations.
/squaresolidMarketing . Nothing is traded or managed until the dollars come in.
Anyone who joins your ﬁrm or board will want to know how you
plan to grow your business. What channels of investors will youapproach—institutional investors including funds of hedge funds, con-
sultants, large family ofﬁces, pension funds or smaller family ofﬁces,
wealth management ﬁrms, high net worth (HNW) individuals, and ac-credited investor clubs? Here is a hint: In our asset-raising experience,
the latter should be 80 percent of your focus if you are managing less
than $100 million. What resources do you or should you have in placeto meet these goals? Third-party marketers? Databases of investors?
An in-house marketing specialist? How much does this cost and when
should these resources be put in place?
HEDGE FUND PITCH BOOK CREATION
Following is a list of tips for professionals looking to create a pitch book
for their hedge fund. My advice to both $90 million and $1 million hedge
funds is that you can never start this process too early. It is an iterative and
constantly evolving project which will never be complete. Here are the top
10 tips for creating hedge fund marketing materials.
1.Think long-term. Invest in creating a robust, institutional-quality pitch
book the ﬁrst time around, and complete ﬁve drafts of it internally
before showing it to a single investor.
2.Emphasize the strengths of your team, investment process, and risk
management controls and how they all interact inside the operations of
your hedge fund.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 81
3.Make your competitive advantage clear and do not rely on canned
phrases such as “positive returns in bull or bear markets.” Anyone whoreviews hedge fund materials for a living will see these by the hour. Your
advantage must be unique.
4.Stress the importance and individual functions of the team, their expe-
riences, and their pedigree. This should be the foundation upon which
everything else is built.
5.Do not send any pitch book or marketing material out before speaking
with a qualiﬁed compliance or legal counsel on the team.
6.Create a one-page marketing sheet, a PowerPoint presentation of 13
to 20 or more slides, and a one-page newsletter which would be re-leased monthly providing your view of the markets in your niche area
of expertise.
7.Work with high-caliber service providers so that you don’t draw extra
skepticism as a relatively new fund, which may already be receiving
extra scrutiny by potential investors and advisers.
8.Use your whole team, your prime brokerage business partners, and
other service providers to improve your marketing materials. Profes-
sionals who work in prime brokerage or administration see many typesof marketing materials and can help provide valuable feedback at no
additional cost to your fund.
9.Do not create a PowerPoint presentation that is longer than 30 slides.
There are some institutional money managers who run three similar
funds and will sometimes cover each of these in a single presentation,
but this is the exception. Ninety-ﬁve percent of the people to whom youwill send the PowerPoint presentation will not read more than 15 pages
of the material unless you are walking them through it over the phone
or in person.
10.Purchase the rights to graphics; choose a unique, simple, professional
layout for the presentation; and use the newest software diagramming
tools to create an institutional-quality presentation. Coming into a meet-
ing with a Word document or 25 pages of bullet points is not very ef-
fective. It is hard enough to catch investors’ attention and bring them tothe table to discuss your fund. You don’t want to lose them due to the
aesthetics of your PowerPoint.
SYED ALI, CEO, SATURN PARTNERS, LLC
For this chapter I interviewed Syed Ali, CEO of Saturn Partners, LLC. Ihave had a relationship with Syed for close to two years, ﬁrst starting as a
consultant to help his company update their marketing materials and most82 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
recently by joining their advisory board as a business development adviser.
I sat down with Syed to have him share his story of how he started hishedge fund.
Richard Wilson: I speak with lots of professionals who want to start one
but they are not sure if they have the “right” background. How exactly
did you get to start your own hedge fund?
Syed Ali: I found a passion in trading when I saw an ad in a commodities
magazine. I initially started trading in silver futures and lost the entire
$10,000 I had saved diligently. At that time I was in part-time management
at UPS and would make my trades on a phone while I was supervising mycrew, and at that time there were no cell phones. Shortly thereafter my
manager wanted me to get into full-time management, but a requirement
then was that everyone had to drive a delivery package car for a period
of time. So I saved up $75,000 over time and was trading silver, orange
juice, sugar, and the grains. It was a good thing I was single at that time.The only way I could trade back then was using all the pay phones on my
delivery route. Looking back, it certainly was amazing I delivered all the
packages in a timely manner. I went through more hardships and lost allthe money.
Richard Wilson: That must have been a humbling experience.
Syed Ali: This was a very humbling experience but I still had a passion
for trading. I then met a person named Don M., and that was a turning
point in my life. Since he had the ﬁnancial means, he suggested that I
trade for him. I traded stocks and it took a few more years to develop ourmethodology. This man is one of the most patient and honorable people I
have ever known. We decided to start a hedge fund so we could reap some
of the rewards for all the work that was put into our system.
Richard Wilson: So when did you actually launch your hedge fund?
Syed Ali: We started trading operations in November 2006 as a long/short
equity fund. Leading up to this we hired a law ﬁrm to do our private
placement memorandum (PPM), and then we had to get an accountant
and shortly thereafter an auditor. We did this as we went along, hoping
to avoid any land mines. Since we had a positive year in 2006 and 2007,
we thought that it would be a little easier raising funds, but that was not
the case. I made contact with the person at my brokerage ﬁrm at the endof 2007 to see if he could be of assistance in raising funds, but he did not
have a decent platform. In June 2008, through the help of our auditor,
we switched brokerage ﬁrms since they had a good platform in raising myassets under management (AUM).
Although 2008 was a tough year for us and many others, we had a gain
for the year. I was relieved because I don’t think I slept from SeptemberHedge Fund Start-Up Guru 83
2008 to December 2008, and that had to be the toughest period I had
encountered. With all the turmoil in the markets, it looked very grim forour fund in raising AUM, since redemptions were the only game in town.
I was hoping that things would change toward the latter part of 2009. Let
me say this, that along the way there were many people who helped us,
and that is an essential ingredient to survivability.
Richard Wilson: So what have you learned the hard way by launching your
own hedge fund that you wish someone had told you before you startedyour hedge fund business? What lessons could you share with others now
starting hedge funds?
Syed Ali: Since I do not live in a large city, it was tough to get certain
questions answered in relation to launching a hedge fund since there
were many local professionals who had no idea what a hedge fund was
about. Actually our ﬁrst accountant had to educate himself on hedge fund
accounting. I wished I was connected to a network of informed individuals
who could have walked me through the process. I wished that someonehad informed me that it was going to be a tough road and that just
having good returns was not the only factor in raising funds. Completing
the Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional (CHP) Designation Program bythe Hedge Fund Group helped; the articles, required readings, and video
content give valuable information for those starting funds. The CHP helps
with credibility, foundational industry knowledge, and the ability to speak
the industry language.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of hedge fund training, please
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
Online
Richard Wilson: While I know that some cities such as New York, London,
and Geneva are famous for housing thousands of hedge funds, I havespoken with hundreds of funds in Alaska, Egypt, Sydney, Moscow, and
S˜ao Paulo in similar situations as you were. I think that identifying proper
advisers and consultants along the way is critical to keep you on a straightpath; sometimes the wrong service providers can cost you years of time
and possibly even the viability of your business. Do you have any other
advice related to service providers that you learned along the way?84 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Syed Ali: Yes, we also learned that it was important to have a knowledgeable
law ﬁrm that not only can help with a PPM but could guide one throughthe many pitfalls of what can or cannot be disclosed or said. Also, hav-
ing a multipartner accounting ﬁrm as a hedge fund administrator to put
investors at ease and possibly guide you to grow organically.
Richard Wilson: What if you had just one piece of advice you wanted
a hedge fund manager to take away from this interview? What
should they keep in mind and remember each day while running theirbusiness?
Syed Ali: Continue to post returns with minimum drawdowns. This is prob-
ably the most important advice I can give anyone. Be patient. Do notrisk too much on one company or event. Anticipate and do not react. If
you are unsure, get out. Make sure you ﬁnd an established hedge fund
administration ﬁrm and law ﬁrm that have a good platform for them to
help you grow out your infrastructure. The hardest thing I learned was to
control drawdowns. This is a must in the ﬁrst three years, which are themost critical.
Richard Wilson: That is great advice. I actually hear a mirror of that ad-
vice from investors often. Most investors have little patience for volatilereturns. Wealth management and family ofﬁce investors especially have a
hard time explaining to their end HNW or ultra high net worth (UHNW)
investors why their portfolio might ﬂuctuate, and this can lead to re-
demptions. I think your advice here is in line with my experience that the
stability of solid performance is one of the top three things investors look
for. How long did it take you to launch your hedge fund?
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video called “What Is a Family Ofﬁce?” please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Family-
Ofﬁce
Syed Ali: It took us six months to launch our fund from start to ﬁnish.
We formed our fund around an LLC and the total cost of doing so was
$25,000.
Richard Wilson: I think that is important to share. I often see two extremes
in the industry. Either hedge funds pay $80,000 to $120,00 or more forHedge Fund Start-Up Guru 85
more simple types of fund formation services when they could get the
same services for $30,000 to $60,000 from another experienced ﬁrm, ormanagers see this cost as unneeded and they try to ﬁnd someone to form
their fund for $2,000 or less. Most of the hedge fund experts and consul-
tants I work with agree on $15,000 to $60,000 being what most hedge
funds need to spend to retain quality legal advisory services while forming
their funds. The more complicated the structure, the more expensive this
part of the start-up process tends to be. What was the most difﬁcult partof this formation process for you?
Syed Ali: The most difﬁcult part for me was understanding all of the doc-
uments to the hedge fund, such as the PPM, and being knowledgeableenough to speak with investors and discuss the different sections of the
documents.
Richard Wilson: What do you see as the main challenge of running a hedge
fund today?
Syed Ali: The main challenge I see is reestablishing trust and being as trans-
parent as possible, in light of market conditions and fraud. I also feel
that it’s very challenging to get to the next step from being a one-man
or one-woman shop into broadening out the infrastructure into a realbusiness.
Richard Wilson: I agree. I believe that having the right pedigree on your
team, an audited track record by a well-known ﬁrm, an independent
board, and great service providers can help investors hedge against this
fraud risk to some degree. These are moving from the nice-to-have box
to the must-have box quickly. What do you believe is helping you raiseassets right now?
Syed Ali: I feel that being in as many databases online as possible, developing
great marketing materials, and using the type of capital-raising articles andadvice you provide with an in-house team is what is needed to grow an
emerging hedge fund.
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you currently use?
Syed Ali: We have a one-page marketing PDF that summarizes our strat-
egy and performance. We then also have a detailed 26-page PowerPointpresentation which covers our team, investment principles, investment
process, risk management processes, performance, terms, and service
providers. We have poured a lot of time into this one document andit is the key tool we use to market our fund to new investors.
Richard Wilson: Thank you for your time and sharing what you have learned
while growing your hedge fund. I’m sure this will be helpful to many otherswho hope to follow this same path at some point.
Syed Ali: Thank you.86 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
NAKUL NAYYAR, QUANTITATIVE
TRADING/SUPPORT, QUAD CAPITAL
My next interview was completed with Nakul Nayyar, an expert in trading
who works for a U.S.-based hedge fund manager; he was also interviewed
in Chapter 2.
Richard Wilson: What would you say are the top four most common or
dangerous trading-related mistakes of hedge fund start-ups or emerging
hedge fund managers?
1.I think all parties are aware on a certain level that the immediate re-
sults are of vital psychological importance. Though the fund may have
been marketed for longer-term performance, investors are watching
your ﬁrst performance reports with a lot of interest. Although it’s nextto impossible to time your returns, it is important that managers stay
focused and disciplined on risk management and speciﬁcally on avoid-
ing drawdowns early on. The excitement and pleasure of performingwell early on can create overconﬁdence, overselling, and overhype,
which could work adversely. Conversely, poor performance can lead
to undisciplined or revenge trading, which obviously can have negativeconsequences. Practical advice is to play small, put some green on the
screen, and most importantly to get the investors comfortable with you
as a manager and your trading style.
2.Don’t be afraid to start small. One doesn’t need to start a fund with
$100 million, the best accounting and auditing, and spacious ofﬁces.
Look seriously at a managed-account structure to start. These offerlow start-up costs, transparency, and reporting through the broker.
Don’t put the cart in front of the horse; your absolute main goal at
start-up is to deliver the performance that was marketed. Once track
record and performance are established, the capital will come. If your
strategy involves illiquid or hard-to-value (read: non-exchange-traded)assets, then consider the private equity route as opposed to a hedge
fund.
3.Proprietary trading and hedge fund trading are different animals. At
the risk of making generalizations, it has been my experience that prop
traders usually emphasize absolute return giving a certain amount of
risk. Hedge fund traders, by contrast, emphasize risk-adjusted perfor-mance, primarily because most investors do as well. Additionally, prop
traders are allowed large latitudes in terms of strategy, whereas a hedge
fund trader may be constrained to a speciﬁc approach of asset class.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 87
These are extremely important distinctions and should not be taken
lightly.
4.Failing to differentiate your fund in a mountain of other similar funds
is another big mistake. You have highlighted this a few times at Hedge-
FundBlogger.com and through your Hedge Fund Group. Networking
and contacts are usually the best methods to attract capital in early
stage start-ups. However, if a fund is forced to utilize more traditional
challenges, then remember to account for the other 100 or more ﬁrmsthat also boast an impressive track record, low risk, diversiﬁcation,
and so on, that you outline in your marketing approach. The topic of
differentiation should be of primary focus in the funds marketing plan.
Richard Wilson: I agree. Paying close attention to drawdowns and positions
that are bleeding is something I hear traders refer to often. I think that
watching your month-to-month performance is more important any other
metric or time frame, really. Even seven-year track records get broken
down to the month-to-month level of scrutiny and curiosity.
Can you suggest four best practices or valuable trading lessons learned
through all of your experience? These lessons could be related to working
on a trading team, using the right trading tools, developing your own
system, cutting losses, and so on.
Nakul Nayyar: Sure, here are my top four best practices or best pieces of
trading-related advice that I can provide:
1.Risk management is everything. There are a thousand and one reasons
to enter a trade, but once the money is on the table, none of those
reasons matter. This was an important lesson in my evolution as a
trader. Unfortunately, the preponderance of books, articles, blogs, andpseudo mentors usually focus primarily on your entry criteria. It’s sexy
and it sells; risk management is not. If you read interviews of great
traders and investors, you will hear everyone talk about risk and not
some fancy entry rules. Warren Buffett: “Rule number 1: Never lose
money. Rule number 2: Never forget rule number 1.” George Soros:
“My approach works not by making valid predictions but by allowing
me to correct false ones.” Bruce Kovner: “In real estate, it’s location,
location, location. In money management, it’s risk management, riskmanagement, risk management.” Get the point?
2.Understand behavioral ﬁnance and especially biases about money.
Although understanding some of the biases involved in a trading de-cision will not guarantee you will avoid these pitfalls, being cognizant
that they exist is the best hedge available. Even quantitative traders can
beneﬁt greatly from understanding behavioral ﬁnance. One such beneﬁt88 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
is idea generation, as investor psychology can create inefﬁciencies. An-
other beneﬁt is to help traders understand their own inherent biasesin system testing such as excessive curve ﬁtting, constant interference
with executions, ﬁddling with or changing parameters, or marrying a
strategy. Quant trading eliminates one set of biases for a complete set
of new ones.
3.Try to maintain a trading log as detailed as possible, especially when
starting a new strategy. If at all possible, paper-trade for a while. Thislog will be very important once you start comparing real-time statistics
to historical or back-tested results. Additionally, a trading log will force
you to look closely at individual trades. When trading a strategy, it isimportant to understand how and why your edge exists and to learn
from experience when it works and when it doesn’t.
4.To quantitative traders, ﬁt the security to the model, not the model
to the security. You will be glad you did. In other words, if you are
researching mean-reversion trading, look at securities with a mean-reversion tendency. Similarly with trend following: QCOM will behave
very differently from BIDU. This should free up some time to work on
your portfolio allocation, which is far more important anyway.
Richard Wilson: What types of risk management tools have you found most
effective while trading?
Nakul Nayyar: I would name three tools as most effective in risk manage-
ment:
1.Options are securities designed for risk management. The interesting
thing about options is the ability to design a risk-to-reward criterionbefore the trade is made. I have met many traders who utilize options
as a leverage tool and not as risk management. Though it is one of the
uses, I believe that notion is misplaced.
2.A complete trading plan with levels of entry, exits, contingencies, and
so on, is an effective risk management tool that many either get com-placent or too lazy to follow through on. When something is in writing
it is much more difﬁcult to rationalize away our initial ideas on the
trade.
3.Having someone else, a competent risk manager perhaps or co-worker,
review and monitor positions can be highly beneﬁcial. We are con-
stantly ﬁghting our biases in this game and a fresh pair of eyes andopinions can allow the trader to reanalyze the situation. Oftentimes a
trader will go for a walk, step away from it for a while, which allows
them to regain perspective.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 89
Richard Wilson: How do you see hedge fund trading and the industry chang-
ing over the next few years? Do you see the use of models and black boxtrading fading away or remaining strong in certain parts of the industry?
Or maybe the industry is trading in more international markets than ever
before? What trends are you seeing from your perspective?
Nakul Nayyar: I can name three basic trends:
1.In the quantitative trading space, I see a commoditization of the ultra-
high-frequency space. It has been termed an “arms” race and, as such,
that space will soon be dominated by the largest, most capitalized play-ers. For example, at one point, triangular arbitrage was a strategy that
once was lucrative but now is no longer a viable strategy for a majority
of market players. It is obviously still being done, but participants willbe forced to move further out of the risk curve and place more focus
on forecasting over arbitrage.
2.There is also a very clear bifurcation in the hedge fund space based
on liquidity of the strategy. Hedge funds will focus more on exchange-
traded and liquid products, and those strategies that trade in illiquidor hard-to-value assets will likely choose a private equity formation.
3.Obviously there is more emphasis on transparency and investors’ access
to their capital, so operational requirements will become a vital partof a hedge fund business. Many hedge funds, especially start-ups, will
look for more turnkey approaches or, more appropriately, a managed
account structure.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter contains a great deal of advice, stories, and tips on how to bothstart a hedge fund and grow an emerging hedge fund. If you are looking
to someday start a hedge fund, or are in charge of marketing an emerging
hedge fund manager, this chapter may have been the most valuable one foryou within this book. Some of the key lessons included in this chapter:
/squaresolidMost hedge funds need at least three to ﬁve years to raise enough capitalto create a sustainable business.
/squaresolidComplete thorough due diligence on your service providers; have at
least a short two- to three-page request for proposal (RFP) for them to
complete while you are deciding who to work with going forward.
/squaresolidInvest in yourself, your processes, infrastructure, service providers,
hedge fund training, and relationships. Others prefer to invest with
you or after you, not before you have built a strong business system.90 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
/squaresolidWhile creating your pitch book think long-term, stress your unique
selling proposition (USP), use service providers and compliance advisersto improve the presentation, stress your team, and use a graphic designer
or sales copy writer if you don’t have those skills in-house.
/squaresolidSyed Ali offers advice for emerging hedge fund managers: Watch draw-
downs, don’t overcorrect, and be very patient while building your track
record.
/squaresolidNakul Nayyar recommends that emerging hedge fund managers should
be unafraid to start small, have systematic risk management in place,
create a complete trading plan, always maintain a trading log, and
understand behavioral ﬁnance.
Free Resource : Learn more about hedge fund start-ups at HedgeFund
StartupGuru.com.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: Nakul Nayyar suggests that you create a detailed trading
plan so that you can take more aggressive positions within the portfolioand have those moves documented on paper within the ﬁrm.
2.True or false: Having someone else review your trades, look at your risk
levels, and analyze your positions can be beneﬁcial. This can bring newperspective to everything that is going on within the portfolio.
3.Above everything else,
is most important, even more im-
portant than for trades.
a.Risk management, entry points.
b.Entry points, risk management.
c.Trading logs being updated, risk management.
d.Trading logs being updated, trading plans.
4.Within this chapter it is suggested that should be the focus
above all else while marketing a fund.
a.Transparency.
b.Operations.
c.Differentiation.
d.Outsourcing.
5.True or false: One difference between prop traders and hedge fund
managers is that prop traders are allowed large latitudes in terms of
strategy, whereas a hedge fund trader may be constrained to a speciﬁc
approach of asset class.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 91
6.True or false: Syed Ali believes that putting your fund into as many
hedge fund research databases as possible is a bad idea and can hurt thebrand of your hedge fund for two main reasons.
7.The two main challenges that Syed Ali and many emerging hedge fund
managers face is moving up the learning curve on all of the legal and
industry terms in the industry. The other main challenge is moving from
a
to a .
a.Small start-up hedge fund, fund of hedge fund business.
b.Small start-up hedge fund, $10 billion-plus fund within two years.
c.Small start-up hedge fund, service provider to other hedge funds.
d.Small start-up hedge fund, more established hedge fund business with
proper infrastructure in place.
8.Which of the following is notsuggested as a way to both address fraud
risk and lower investor fears of this type of risk:
a.Create an independent board of advisers.
b.Employ trusted service providers and business providers.
c.Ensure you employ a high-pedigree, experienced team.
d.Have respected ofﬁce space in either New York City or London.
9.True or false: Within this chapter we suggest to forget building relation-
ships until you have a solid track record, team, and a great infrastructure
in place—otherwise you will end up wasting your time and resources.
10.It is recommended that you do not show an investor your marketing
documents or information on your fund until it has been reviewed at
least times by your team of service providers.
a.3
b.5
c.10
d.15
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 6
Dedicated to Due Diligence
It is the studying that you do after your school days that really
counts. Otherwise, you know only that which everyone else
knows.
—Henry Doherty
(This chapter was written by Gregory Schink, a wealth management
professional who helped lead the efforts to create the CHP Designation
Level 2 Program on due diligence.)
From the late 1990s through the third quarter of 2007, investors felt an
overwhelming conﬁdence in the validity of the investments they were select-
ing, and more especially the managers who ran them. Bernard L. Madoff
Investment Securities had been brought up to the SEC for possible violations
since as early as 1999. The SEC was alerted to possible fraud concerning Sir
Allen Stanford as early as 2002. The credit crunch of 2007 was what ﬁnally
brought these frauds to light.
The possibility of fraud going undetected on such a massive scale has
caused a revolution in how in-depth due diligence will go when investigatinga hedge fund and its manager(s) for potential investors. The days of run-
and-gun investing when investors were chasing the highest returns possible
(think Long Term Capital Management) are gone. Hedge funds must becrystal clear on their backgrounds, the processes they use, and the style they
intend to implement. This is helping bring hedge funds more into the main-
stream and change the public’s opinion of how secretive they have appeared
in the past, as well as making quality due diligence a must for high net worth
(HNW) investors looking to invest in the hedge fund arena.
Why important : Due to recent scandals, media attention, fraud, and
insider trading cases, due diligence is one of the most important topics in theindustry. This is because due diligence is the forum through which fund
93The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 94 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
managers may communicate their transparency, proactive institutional-
quality operations, and robust investment process. It is also important be-cause it is the method through which accredited and institutional investors
attempt to avoid funds that may be more likely to be involved in scandals,
fraud, blowups, or insider trading cases. If you are not aware of best prac-
tices and trends in the due diligence space, you may miss opportunities to
manage risk or obtain additional capital.
In this chapter, the interviews Gregory completed with two prominent
experts in the due diligence arena and Richard Wilson consisted of a series
of questions to gain a further understanding of their experience in the due
diligence ﬁeld. The questions include personal background questions suchas what is the preferred background for someone who wishes to start a
profession in the due diligence arena concerning hedge funds; and what’s
the best advice you can give to someone starting out in due diligence. We
also examine some due diligence best practice tips that each interviewee has,
such as some telltale signs of a shady manager/fund, and what resourcesa hedge fund manager should have in place in order to efﬁciently move
through a due diligence questionnaire (DDQ) process more efﬁciently.
Through each interview, we present three different backgrounds, opin-
ions, and approaches to successful due diligence. Each individual has his
own method of performing successful due diligence, but there are underly-
ing similarities that are consistent across the due diligence domain that must
be highlighted.
SCOTT FREUND, PRESIDENT, GCC FAMILY
WEALTH MANAGEMENT
For this chapter’s ﬁrst interview, I spoke with Scott Freund, president of
GCC Family Wealth Management. Scott graduated with a bachelor of sci-
ence degree in mechanical engineering from Virginia Tech in 1991. Scott’s
investment background began with a boutique investment bank in Bethesda,
Maryland, in 1994, and then in 1996 he moved to the private client group
at Wheat First Butcher Singer (now Wachovia Securities). In 1999, Scott be-
came a senior consultant with the Investment Consulting Services Group of
Morgan Stanley. He was one of the ﬁrst advisers at Morgan Stanley to earnthe Certiﬁed Investment Management Analyst (CIMA) designation, and was
also a Rule 144 specialist.
Scott joined the Private Bank at Bank of America in 2003 as a senior
vice president and private client adviser, dealing not only with individuals
and families, but with family ofﬁces as well. Working with the gatekeepers
of these family ofﬁces served as a stepping-stone for the foundation, in JulyDedicated to Due Diligence 95
2005 in Bethesda, Maryland, of Family Ofﬁce Research, a multifamily ofﬁce
founded to provide objective advice as well as a higher level of customizationand customer service for high net worth clients.
GCC Family Wealth Management was formed as a result of a merger
with Family Ofﬁce Research. It is a multifamily ofﬁce designed to manage the
complex wealth of a limited number of high net worth individuals, families,
and foundations. GCC Family Wealth Management is a collaboration of ex-
pertise from different wealth management disciplines, including investmentmanagement, private banking, estate planning, insurance advisory, and risk
management.
Scott Freund’s recommendation for someone pursuing a job in the due
diligence ﬁeld is to gain knowledge in the legal, accounting, or investment
arenas. He believes that good due diligence requires a very thorough indi-
vidual who takes nothing at face value, and he implements the “don’t trust
and deﬁnitely verify” philosophy into his practice. He also thinks that due
diligence is better performed by a ﬁduciary adviser as opposed to an adviserwho works on a commission basis.
On average, Scott spends three to six months on a due diligence report
for a single fund. It’s mandatory to have background checks done on allprincipals involved in the fund during this stage. Some telltale signs that
something may be amiss are if a manager is too quick to close or if he says
they “need the money right away.” On the ﬂip side, trustworthy managers
are always willing to let you speak with their auditors, attorneys, and share-
holders and will encourage you to do so. Scott believes in the importance of
checking on the status of the board of directors of each fund. This includesgetting the telephone numbers of each member and verifying that each one
of them is still associated, is proud to continue that association, and whether
they are getting compensated in any way for being on the board of directorsfor the said fund.
One of the best standard due diligence questionnaires (DDQs) available
comes from the Investment Management Consultants Association (IMCA).
Scott believes that if fund managers would provide a DDQ (see Appendix B)
and background checks to the due diligence team, it would streamline theentire process; they’re going to ﬁnd out, regardless.
BRIAN REICH, PRESIDENT AND FOUNDER, ATRATO
ADVISORS LLC
For our second interview with a due diligence expert, I spoke with Brian
Reich, president and founder of Atrato Advisors LLC. Brian holds a bache-
lor of science degree from Cornell University (1996) and a master’s degree96 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
in business administration (2001) from the Stern School of Business at New
York University. Prior to business school, Brian worked as a strategy con-sultant focused on the health care sector. He began his investment career at
Salomon Smith Barney in the Derivatives Capital Markets Group. He then
served as a senior research analyst and Investment Committee member at
Richcourt Fund Advisors, the fund-of-funds business previously owned by
the Citco Group.
Later, Brian was named the director and global head of hedge fund
research for Deutsche Bank’s private wealth management division. At
Deutsche Bank, Brian oversaw the construction, development, and man-
ager selection for the bank’s global open-architecture hedge fund advisorypractice, and supervised a team of analysts in the United States, Europe, and
Asia. Most recently, Brian was director of hedge fund research for Cantor
Advisors LP, the asset management division of Cantor Fitzgerald & Com-
pany. He joined Cantor to start up and establish a hedge fund investment
practice, and to build and develop an institutional research process and itssupporting team.
Atrato Advisors was founded by Brian in October 2008 to meet the
rising demand for professional and individualized research, advice, andstrategic direction in the alternative investment arena. Atrato is a boutique
specializing in hedge fund research and portfolio management advisory ser-
vices that works with direct allocators to hedge funds as an independent
and objective provider of research, risk management, and portfolio advisory
services.
Brian believes that although there are many backgrounds that are ap-
propriate and relevant for those wishing to do hedge fund research, one’s
prior experience should have some relevant strengths in the various aspects
of due diligence. Prior experience in trading, investment research, account-ing, operations, journalism, quantitative analysis, and risk management are
all background jobs that Brian ﬁnds complementary to hedge fund due
diligence. He points out that the ability to be versatile across all of these
areas is a positive for someone wishing to do hedge fund due diligence as
a career.
This leads to Brian’s advice for anyone considering hedge fund due
diligence: Become a good “all-around athlete.” There are quantitative, qual-
itative, investigative, and instinctual skills that one needs to have to be agood analyst. The ability to communicate and craft well-thought-out argu-
ments to invest or not to invest is also a key aspect of the position. Brian
believes that if you’re good or excel at one thing, you should work on gettingstronger in other areas where you are not as experienced.
Brian says that he enjoys the challenge of trying to ﬁnd the one piece or
several pieces of information that are ultimately going to drive his investmentDedicated to Due Diligence 97
decision the most. In nearly all cases, in doing fund research, the client is
sitting across the table from a manager who is trying to paint the prettiestpossible picture, and it’s always in the portfolio manager’s best interest
to highlight the positives and downplay negatives. Brian looks forward to
probing around each aspect of the organization, not knowing where he’s
going to ﬁnd that crucial and possibly hidden data point.
The time Brian spends on due diligence for a hedge fund varies greatly,
but on average it takes about three to four months. The biggest lesson Brianhas learned is to share information with peers and competitors. He thinks
it is virtually impossible to know everything about a fund manager or his
business. There are lots of smart, talented researchers out there who may takea different perspective or focus on different factors than he does, and that’s
who he wants to communicate with. He feels that if sharing information
with a competitor can help protect their client by bringing to their attention
a relevant piece of information, then he is acting in the best possible ﬁduciary
manner.
When watching out for a shady manager, Brian points out that there
are the usual obvious signs such as questionable business structures, obscure
service provider relationships, and evasiveness in the due diligence process.Brian believes that some of the more subtle things are important to look
out, for such as risk-taking behavior and tendencies. Identifying patterns of
behavior either in trading record or career progression is a softer way of
trying to ﬁgure out what a portfolio manager is most likely to do when his
back is against the wall. As part of their operational due diligence, Atrato
also veriﬁes the existence and roles of the speciﬁc board members throughonshore and offshore counsel.
Brian ﬁnds that trustworthy managers always have the most trans-
parency. The more a manager is willing to show an investor (and to helpwith the veriﬁcation of his veracity), the better. Although it may sound coun-
terintuitive, Brian points out that bad performance can actually be a sign
of honest management. If an investor has good information about a fund’s
exposures and portfolio holdings, it’s usually pretty easy to predict how
that manager would have performed in the past. If, based on an analysis ofa fund manager’s portfolio, you would expect him to do poorly during a
certain time period and he actually didn’t , then a red ﬂag should go up.
Brian doesn’t believe in administering a boilerplate DDQ. He ﬁnds that
using such questionnaires greatly limits the creativity one needs to carefully
and effectively analyze an investment opportunity, and it allows the fund
manager to predict and carefully massage crafted messages. Most managersproduce a similarly formatted Alternative Investment Management Associa-
tion (AIMA) type questionnaire anyway. The AIMA standard questionnaire
is already the most used tool throughout the industry. More candid answers98 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
are generated throughout the dialogue with a manager when the conversa-
tion is less structured and more free-ﬂowing. A competent and experiencedCFO and COO also help the process ﬂow more smoothly.
On the operational side, getting the right infrastructure and service
providers and internal operational staff is the key to early success. This also
means the manager is investing in his fund early on, but he’ll raise money
quickly and generally be rewarded in the long run. Brian points out that
most hedge fund managers are hardworking, smart people who are tryingto do right by their investors.
As a case study, Brian gave us the facts on a 2002 interview with a
fund manager who traded a discretionary global macro strategy. The fundmanager had pedigree from one of the largest multistrategy hedge funds in
the world at the time, and was allowed to show his track record going back
to the mid-1990s for proﬁt and loss (P&L) that he managed while employed
at his previous ﬁrm. There was one notable omission from his track record,
as he did not post a performance number for August and September 1998. Ofcourse, this was a crucial stress test for a hedge fund manager, particularly
trading a macro strategy, as this was the time of the Russia default and
the LTCM collapse. When pressed on this, he claimed that he had closedall his positions prior to August and had coincidentally “sat out” those
crucial months. Unsatisﬁed, Brian pressed further in complete disbelief of
this assertion. The portfolio manager became enraged and stormed out of
the meeting. Brian states, “I’ll never know if he was telling the truth or not,
but the fury by which he ended the meeting (something I had never seen
before nor have I seen again) was enough to paint a picture of a highlyvolatile persona and one whom I didn’t want managing our money.”
Obviously, Brian and Scott have a different approach to hedge fund due
diligence. The most notable difference is the use of a standardized DDQ ver-sus the aversion to one. Brian and Scott are both of the opinion that verifying
the validity of the board of directors of each fund is of the utmost impor-
tance, and that a telltale sign of a good manager is being transparent and
forthright with information about himself, his fund, and his background.
They both also stress that the real due diligence comes from the interviewsand information received, however that information is collected.
RICHARD WILSON, HEDGE FUND GROUP,
CHP DESIGNATION, HEDGEFUNDBLOGGER.COM
For this chapter’s ﬁnal interview, Gregory Schink interviewed Richard
Wilson about his experience in the hedge fund world and his experienceDedicated to Due Diligence 99
and advice concerning hedge fund due diligence. Richard has a background
in capital raising and risk management. He holds a bachelor’s degree in busi-ness administration from Oregon State University and an MBA in marketing
from the University of Portland. Directly out of college, he helped raise cap-
ital for an investment bank and a start-up tech ﬁrm and then went into risk
management consulting and process design advisory work. While he feels
that the consulting gave him a unique perspective, he missed the challenge
and marketing aspect of raising capital.
Richard moved back into a capital-raising role as a third party marketer
for hedge funds, funds of hedge funds, and large asset optimization shops.
This position allowed him to help roll out new products and raise capital forexisting portfolios. Richard eventually was able to help raise over $225 mil-
lion in this ﬁrst third party marketing role and has helped raise another
$100 million-plus since. While Richard didn’t see as many fund managers
each year as an institutional investor may, he received several inquiries each
day and quickly learned why investors must cut most managers out of therunning, based simply on objective criteria such as assets under management
(AUM); there is just not enough time to really look into every manager who
comes toward you with a pitch book and one-pager. Richard’s most recentrole has been running the Hedge Fund Group, CHP Designation, Hedge-
FundBlogger.com, and working on related capital-raising training programs,
directories, and resources for fund managers.
Our interview went on to probe into what Richard thought were some
of the biggest problems in hedge fund due diligence as well as what he
thought was useful advice for this ﬁeld. Poor marketing materials are one ofthe things that stand out right away to Richard as an area that could use
improvement. He believes that many managers with less than $1 billion in
AUM have poor marketing systems, sales pipeline development processes,investor relationship management tools, and educational materials. Most
professionals who start hedge funds are experts at their domains of trading
and portfolio management but have close to no experience in marketing,
sales, and capital raising. This can give the wrong message to investors
while they complete their due diligence. Richard warned that if the principalof the fund hasn’t been coached, if the marketing materials don’t clearly
articulate the investment process, and if the team doesn’t have resources
in place to manage the ongoing relationship, it can end the due diligenceprocess or even prevent it from ever starting.
Due diligence calls are another area of improvement for hedge fund
managers to work on. Completing due diligence calls is an art in itself.Richard thinks that most managers underestimate the importance of what
you say and how you say it during these phone calls. Many institutional100 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
investors and almost all institutional consultants now have databases where
they record and maintain records on every manager they speak to across thecompany. If you blow one single phone call with a consultant who advises
$500 billion in assets, it could take three to four more phone calls to calm
their fears about one issue which could have been misinterpreted in the last
phone call you had with them.
Richard’s tips for avoiding pain in this area would be to work on possible
answers to questions ahead of time and determine how you will reply toimportant questions regarding portfolio position sizes, risk management,
your investment process, and so on. Coordinating who will speak over
the phone, practicing your lines, becoming comfortable explaining yourinvestment perspective verbally, and thinking about all of the different ways
your words can be interpreted are key aspects of being prepared for a phone
interview. If you say something like, “In this market, position sizes mean
nothing,” that can be taken to mean that you don’t keep a consistent position
size through varying markets or that you are taking a large amount of risk inthe portfolio. Richard warns that everything you say can have two to three
meanings and that you should make sure you control that and clarify the
meaning for yourself or after others have spoken on your team.
Richard believes organization is another area that is often overlooked
by hedge fund managers when it comes to due diligence—having everything
ready to send to potential investors before they ask for compliance reports,
positions, holdings, sample portfolio weights, historic team adjustments, full
bios on team members, audit reports, and the necessary legal documents.
Richard warns not to wait until a family ofﬁce decides not to invest in yourﬁrm because you can’t produce one of these reports. Be highly organized
and efﬁcient when it comes to marketing and you will come off as having
been proactive in managing risk, wise in your choice of service providers,and professional in running your business.
Richard always try to advise funds on building their own internal mar-
keting resources because no third-party marketer will ever care more than
the actual manager about raising capital for his own fund. Richard thinks it is
smart to use third-party marketing services in the appropriate circumstancesbut that it shouldn’t be the resource that a hedge fund bets its business on.
Managers must raise capital on their own as well and move up the learning
curve on what it takes to manage a third-party marketer.
Richard also went on to explain some of the most useful tips he com-
monly sees in hedge fund due diligence. Richard notes that the very best
funds have preparation and constant improvement. These funds are alwaysaware of who is going to talk, what will be covered, and what could be
improved before and after each due diligence phone call that occurs. These
can be intense and lengthy calls, and it will help improve your performanceDedicated to Due Diligence 101
if you take notes on what is said during the call or ask the consultants for
permission to record them for later review.
Questions will be asked that are speciﬁc to each fund’s performance and
background. The answers to these are very important, such as explaining
the fund’s quarter 3 (Q3) performance back in 2006, or why its position size
changed from 2007 to 2008, or why the chief investment ofﬁcer left the ﬁrm
after ﬁve years of running the portfolio. These questions must be answered
carefully, yet a manager does not want to bring up all these issues in thePowerPoint presentation or it would be more than 100 pages long. The
solution that Richard has found works best is typing up speciﬁc answers in
one- to three-page Word documents that are complete, accurate, and detailedresponses to these tough questions that due diligence will uncover regarding
the speciﬁc fund and personnel. This allows the manager to either read
from the typed responses over the phone or e-mail the consultant the one-
page explanation regarding that topic, allowing professionals to review the
detailed answer and evidence and then ask any follow-up questions that mayarise. This strategy helps the manager demonstrate that he is well organized,
prepared, and knowledgeable about the perceived risks of his fund.
Having a lot of clarity is also key. Richard advises managers to know
the ﬁve points they really want to drive home during the due diligence
process about their speciﬁc fund. How are you positioning your fund and in
what tangible ways is your fund different? Simply saying that your returns
are uncorrelated with the stock market and you can make money in any
market condition is not tangible or unique but heard every hour in the
industry.
Richard has completed due diligence on hundreds of hedge fund man-
agers from the perspective of a marketer but never as an analyst or fund of
funds due diligence professional. Typically throughout the industry, though,he thinks the worst type of due diligence process is one that not only uses
an AUM ﬁgure as a ﬁrst-pass cutting tool but then also skips through most
of the other steps needed to allocate funds. This practice is rampant and
bad for investors, bad for the industry, and bad for small, innovative hedge
fund managers. It slows down the natural process of evolution in the in-dustry and provides the largest of investors with less appealing long-term
returns. The best due diligence Richard has seen is by ﬁrms that take on a
very limited set of clients each year so they can dedicate adequate resourcestoward each fund they analyze. It takes time to look at portfolio returns and
DDQs, complete on-site visits, and check Web databases on performance.
Richard feels that the biggest difference between those who do due diligenceright and those who do it wrong are poor talent and resources compared to
great experience combined with consistent, detailed-oriented process-driven
approaches.102 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
DUE DILIGENCE EFFECTS ON HEDGE FUNDS
To understand due diligence and how it affects a hedge fund, one must look
into what can happen when due diligence is lacking or not up to par. Let’s
examine three infamous examples of hedge funds blowing up and point out
some examples of how good due diligence could have protected investors
from mistake and/or fraud. The examples used here are Long Term Capital
Management, Bayou Hedge Fund, and Bernie Madoff Investment Securities.
Long Term Capital Mangement
Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) was a U.S. hedge fund founded in1994 by John Meriwether, the former vice chairman and head of bond
trading at Salomon Brothers. The fund’s trading strategies were basedupon various arbitrage designs combined with high amounts of leverage.
Meriwether approached various business owners, celebrities, and university
endowments, but most of the seed money came from companies and indi-
viduals connected to the ﬁnancial industry. When LTCM began trading, the
company had amassed just over $1.01 billion in capital.
1
LTCM used mathematical models to ﬁnd ﬁxed-income arbitrage oppor-
tunities in various government bonds. The managers were making successful
trades betting on convergence strategies in these bonds and had amassed an-nualized returns of over 40 percent in their ﬁrst few years. As their success
grew, so did their assets under management; at the beginning of 1998, the
ﬁrm had equity of $4.72 billion.
This increasing capital base and unheard-of performance put pressure
on LTCM managers to continue to invest the assets they were acquiring,
only they had run out of good ﬁxed-income arbitrage plays. LTCM thenmoved away from the ﬁxed-income arbitrage that had worked so well for it
and strayed into merger arbitrage, equity options, interest rate derivatives,
and interest rate sweeps.
By the time LTCM had started to invest in the more exotic derivatives,
its AUM was $4.72 billion but it had borrowed over $124.5 billion with
assets of around $129 billion, for a debt-to-equity ratio of about 25 to 1.LTCM had off-balance-sheet derivative positions with a notional value of
approximately $1.25 trillion.
The Russian ﬁnancial crisis that started in August 1998 triggered a
ﬂight from foreign bonds to U.S. treasuries, which destroyed LTCM’s
1Nicholas Dunbar, Inventing Money: The Story of Long-Term Capital Management
and the Legends Behind It (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000).Dedicated to Due Diligence 103
ﬁxed-income arbitrage play and caused huge losses of over $1.5 billion.
This caused investors to move for liquidity in their LTCM positions, andthe AUM of LTCM plummeted from $2.3 billion to $400 million in under
a month. This translated to a leverage ratio of over 250 to 1 at the end of
September 1998. The fund was eventually liquidated by 2000.
LTCM teaches us an important fact about hedge fund due diligence:
Know and verify that the hedge fund manager will stay in his designated
style. When investing in various hedge funds for diversiﬁcation across styles,investors are trusting that managers will not stray from their designated
styles to chase the money. As LTCM had success and grew larger, its man-
agers felt more pressure to continue to deliver returns greater than 40 per-cent. As the good ﬁxed-income arbitrage dried up, they moved into deriva-
tives to ﬁll the void and maintain the momentum that investors had come to
expect out of the fund. Had LTCM stuck with what it had excelled at from
the beginning, ﬁxed-income arbitrage, and realized that every year wasn’t
going to yield a 40 percent yield, it would have been in much better shapeto weather the Russian ﬁnancial crisis of 1998.
Bayou Hedge Fund Group
Another example of hedge fund due diligence gone bad was the BayouHedge Fund Group. This was a conglomerate of companies and hedge funds
founded by Samuel Israel III in 1996. The group raised $450 million from
investors.
A very simple background check of Mr. Israel would have shown that
he had a National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) membership
violation in accordance with Series 55 requirements and was censured andﬁned $8,500. This should have been a huge red ﬂag, and an easy one to
uncover at that. Mr. Israel also claimed that he attended Tulane University,
but a simple call to the registrar conﬁrms that he was placed on academic
suspension and subsequently left school without receiving a degree. The
term attended does not mean he received his degree, but the fact that he
does not have an undergraduate degree should have raised a warning ﬂag at
the very least. Lastly, a criminal background check would have found that
Mr. Israel was convicted of a DUI and possession of marijuana at the ageof 43. Although a DUI is not necessarily a deal breaker, the fact that he was
43 years old when it happened and was also found to be carrying marijuana
at the time is a sign of a poor sense of moral character and judgment. Oneof these ﬁndings alone could easily be dismissed, but the combination of all
three indicates a much deeper personality ﬂaw and should have stopped any
investor from placing trust with Mr. Israel.104 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
This is a prime example of where hedge fund due diligence had not
included a thorough manager background check. Mr. Israel’s statementsand actual background showed vast discrepancies. A thorough background
check compared to the statements Mr. Israel provided would have raised
the ﬁrst red ﬂag. Another red ﬂag would have come up due to some of the
events that had occurred in Mr. Israel’s life (i.e., the DUI). A hedge fund
manager holds a great amount of responsibility and therefore should have
displayed virtuous traits throughout his personal and professional life priorto becoming a hedge fund manager.
Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities
The most prominent example of due diligence gone awry is Bernie Madoff.Madoff’s strategy was much more in-depth than the usual fraud, and to
understand it, one must understand how he got started and his background.
Madoff founded the ﬁrm Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities LLC
in 1960 with money he earned working as a lifeguard and sprinkler installer.
The ﬁrm specialized in trading penny stocks, and the technology the ﬁrm
developed eventually became the NASDAQ. The ﬁrm began to function as athird market provider, which bypassed exchange specialist ﬁrms by directly
executing orders over the counter from retail brokers.
Madoff used this function as a way to defer any electronic record of
transactions he supposedly was making for his clients. By trading all of his
options over the counter, he could give the image that he was bypassing
exchange specialist ﬁrms and making trades directly through retail brokers,
and thereby eliminate any paper trail of those trades.
Although this would make only a savvy investor suspicious of Madoff’s
trades, one aspect that should have thrown up a red ﬂag from the be-ginning was clients’ lack of electronic access to the accounts. The only
proof of their holdings was the paper statements they received monthly in
the mail.
There are many highly respected third-party administrators, prime bro-
kers, and audit ﬁrms. Madoff had dealings with none of these and was incharge of doing custody, trading, and administration of every investment in
his fund. He also turned down the opportunity to have managed accounts
with clients, even to the detriment of losing billions of dollars of investments,because of it. This furthered the lack of transparency of his actual underlying
investments.
Madoff had actually served as the chairman of the board of directors
and on the board of governors of the NASD, and maybe his past credentials
had lured more people into his investments.Dedicated to Due Diligence 105
The part of due diligence that is highlighted by the entire Madoff fraud
is transparency, or the lack thereof. Obviously there are in-house tradingmethods, black-box algorithms, and proprietary secrets that each manager
must keep secret to ensure his edge in the hedge fund industry, but electronic
documentation of the underlying funds held by the fund does not necessarily
give away those strategies. Proper due diligence on Madoff’s fund should
have raised red ﬂags due to the fact that he was in control of every aspect of
the investment process, didn’t have a respectable auditor, and would provideno proof of any underlying investment.
2
In an interesting side note, about half of Madoff’s investors were net
winners even after his fund blew up, meaning they had earned/withdrawnmore than their initial investment.
3
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter provides information on recent hedge fund due diligence trends
as well as two interviews with due diligence experts, one from within a family
ofﬁce and the other at an institutional consulting ﬁrm. Some key lessons fromthis chapter include the following:
/squaresolidIf you are looking to work in the hedge fund due diligence space ScottFreund suggests gaining experience in legal, accounting, and various in-
vestment arenas. Brian Reich suggests also being an “all around athlete”
in many different disciplines.
/squaresolidGood due diligence takes a very thorough professional who works onthe “trust but verify” basis who takes nothing at face value.
/squaresolidYou can often tell a lot just by how open a hedge fund is to letting
you speak to their board of advisers, auditors, prime brokers, or other
service providers.
/squaresolidDue diligence on a hedge fund can sometimes take more than six months
but often lasts just two to four months.
/squaresolidWhile hedge fund managers are often experts in trading, risk manage-
ment and portfolio management few are trained in marketing, sales, or
managing due diligence processes and this leads to problems.
2Maureen O’Hara, Market Microstructure Theory (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995), 190.
ISBN 1-55786-443-8.
3Ibid.106 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.This chapter stresses that the main lesson to take away from Long Term
Capital Management is that
a.It is important that a hedge fund manager stay within his designated
style , or investment mandate scope.
b.Foreign exchange investing inside of hedge funds can be very risky
when those bets are made using only a single prime brokerage ﬁrm.
c.Even well-respected hedge funds can blow up.
2.This chapter indicates that is bad for investors, bad for the
industry, and particularly bad for emerging hedge fund managers.
a.Too much transparency.
b.Too much compliance reporting.
c.Eliminating hedge funds from due diligence processes mostly based
on AUM.
d.Eliminating hedge funds from due diligence processes mostly based
on background checks.
3.True or false: In this chapter it is suggested that you take every piece
of feedback from investors, and each question they ask, and work the
detailed answers into your PowerPoint presentation so that you come offas 100 percent prepared and well established to all investors.
4.True or false: It is best to remain highly ﬂexible during hedge fund
due diligence calls while presenting your strategy and team—this way
your team can adapt on the ﬂy to whoever on the team feels like taking
the lead in presenting the details of your investment process and risk
management tools to the ﬁrm completing the due diligence.
5.Typically, many hedge fund managers
how important hedge
fund due diligence calls are with potential investors.
a.Underestimate
b.Overestimate
6.True or false: Hedge fund due diligence takes in-depth quantitative and
qualitative analysis skills to ﬁgure out what is missing or is not being
said, and some of this comes with experience.
7.Brian Reich has found that managers have the most trans-
parency.
a.Small hedge fund.
b.Large hedge fund.
c.Trustworthy.
d.Fast-growing.
8.Which of the following is not suggested as a way to identify potential
problems that exist within the hedge fund during a due diligence process?Dedicated to Due Diligence 107
a.Evasive behavior.
b.Questionable business structures.
c.Small portfolio management teams.
d.Obscure service provider relationships.
9.According to the interviews in this chapter, the hedge fund due diligence
process takes months to be completed.
a.2t o4
b.8t o1 2
c.18 to 24
d.4t o1 2
10. True or false: Hedge fund due diligence professionals always use boiler-
plate due diligence questionnaires, so once you have completed one of
these you will be able to simply use that for all future inquiries.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
dHedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 7
Giant Hedge Funds
On the mountains of truth you can never climb in vain: Either you
will reach a point higher up today, or you will be training your
powers so that you will be able to climb higher tomorrow.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
While most hedge funds are small in size it is typically the largest of hedge
funds which are most secretive. These hedge funds have assets, secrets,
and processes to protect from hungry competitors. This chapter providesa unique insight to some of the marketing, operational, and investing bestpractices of hedge funds with $1 billion or more in assets under management.
Why important : If you are trying to grow a hedge fund it can help to see
what the hedge funds who are receiving most of the new incoming capitalare doing. In this chapter we provide some clues and a peek behind the
curtain to what the largest of hedge funds are doing different from smaller
fund managers in the industry.
BEST PRACTICES FROM $1 BILLION-PLUS
HEDGE FUNDS
Following is a list of ten best practices that I have seen $1 billion-plus hedge
funds employing that are more often than not missing within small teams of
hedge fund professionals. Large well run hedge funds often have:
1.Better research processes in place, and these are constantly being im-
proved in many ways every quarter. They focus on Kazien—constant
improvement.
109The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 110 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.Documentation . Their compliance processes, operational procedures,
compliance checks, internal controls, hiring processes, and risk man-agement techniques are all documented in great detail to help ensure
consistent quality and improve what is being carried out.
3.International marketing and sales teams which cover institutional in-
vestors and consultants in at least Europe and the United States if not
also in Australia, South Africa, South America, and Asia.
4.Deep pedigree. With larger pocketbooks, the largest of hedge funds are
able to retain the most experienced experts not only as adjunct advisers
to the fund but full-time employees or consultants who provide daily or
weekly insights on upcoming investment opportunities.
5.Human resources strategies . Many small hedge funds do not have any
long-term talent development, or Star Employee hiring practices in place.
Larger hedge funds do and must keep their organization moving forward
and growing over the long term.
6.Master DDQs . Every large hedge fund I know of has a very thorough
master due diligence questionnaire that is constantly updated. The larger
the hedge fund the more likely it is that their investors will be asking for
a very thorough DDQ during the due diligence phase.
7.Superior marketing . Larger hedge funds have moved to the top of the
learning curve when it comes to ﬁguring out how to raise capital. They
use multi-modality marketing channels and materials and they have
relationship development processes and goals in place which match up
with the long-term growth goals of the fund. They are also more than
willing to invest in the best graphic designers and sales copy writerswho can provide another edge over those who skimp on their image
and marketing presence.
8.More in-house functions . While large hedge funds still use service
providers and rely upon business partners many of them have large
enough staffs and unique enough processes that some work such as
some investment research, operations, accounting, or marketing may be
done in-house instead of being outsourced to service providers such as
administrators or third party marketers.
9.More veriﬁcation points . The largest of hedge funds have been asked
500 times for their holdings, and 3,000 times for their PowerPoint
presentation. They have completed hundreds of due diligence processesand are use to working with consultants who need to check every fact,
assertion, and claim. They are used to operating within the world of
providing evidence for everything said, and because of this may quicklymeet the requests of investors who ask for such evidence.
10. Long-term strategies and goals . Most large hedge funds I know of plan
for the next three to ﬁve or ﬁve to seven years strategically in who theyGiant Hedge Funds 111
hire, market their fund to, and where they open ofﬁces. In contrast
most smaller hedge funds are very focused on day-to-day or month-to-month operations and most think in terms of one- to three-year plans.
When investors see the fund planning for investing in the long haul, it
shows, and that is part of why some larger hedge funds receive more
allocations than small ones. They have the infrastructure and mind-set
more in common with an institutional investor.
RICHARD ZAHM, PORTFOLIO MANAGER, SECOND
ANGEL FUND
Our ﬁrst interview in this chapter is with Richard Zahm, portfolio manager
of Second Angel Fund.
Richard Wilson: What type of hedge fund do you work for?
Richard Zahm: I’ve focused on asset-based lending (ABL) funds, speciﬁ-
cally bridge lending funds that provide short-term ﬁnancing secured bycommercial real estate.
Richard Wilson: Can you explain how that strategy relates to a more typical
long/short equity fund?
Richard Zahm: The strategies have all of the attributes that equity funds are
now faced with: transparency, compliance, coordination of lock periods
with speciﬁc investments/loans. Fund sizes range from start-ups to around$800 million. I’ve served as co-founder, portfolio manager, underwriter,
servicer, and CCO. The unique element of this type of investment is that it
crosses several disciplines and regulatory regimes: real estate, lending, andinvesting; state regulations with multiple agencies in each state, as well
as a federal overlay. The segment was noncorrelated, but now ﬁnds itself
subject to the backlash brought about by unrelated residential mortgages
and the credit crunch.
Richard Wilson: It sounds like you have worked in a variety of roles, in-
cluding both small funds and an $800 million fund. What would you say
is the number one difference between your hedge fund operations in the
$800 million fund and that of a sub–$100 million hedge fund ﬁrm? Whatreally makes your ﬁrm stand out in terms of operations, trading, or risk
management?
Richard Zahm: A smaller ABL fund contains fewer assets and, as a result,
there’s tighter focus by senior management as to what’s contained in the
portfolio. Personal contact with borrowers and investors is greater and
there’s a good sense of the details of each speciﬁc position. It’s a lot like112 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
being in a small boat: You’re aware of subtle shifts in everything around
you.
You’re also more exposed to changes in conditions than you are in a
larger vessel. A bigger fund provides more opportunity to diversify risk
across a greater number of investments. Performing loans in the fund
provide a cushion against delinquencies and defaults—that is, so long
as the diversiﬁcation model was maintained. However, there’s a strong
tendency for managers to follow a cookie-cutter approach, replicating pre-vious successful loans in terms of type, size, and location. The thinking is,
“It worked before, it’ll work again.” Although this approach solves the
immediate challenge of deploying additional investment dollars ﬂowinginto a fund, it actually works against the core strategy of diversifying loans
in a fund. Concentrations begin to appear. Portfolios become lumpy, ei-
ther by loan type or, worse, by loan size. As investment funds get larger,
it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to maintain lender discipline.
Richard Wilson: How can funds like yours ﬁght against this?Richard Zahm: The differentiator for us has been a combination of discipline
and size itself. We lend on what we know, and keep on top of the loans,
the borrowers, and the individual markets.
Richard Wilson: What advice would you offer to small to medium-size
hedge fund managers who have yet to bridge the gap between the $5 to
$100 million mark and the $1 billion-plus mark?
Richard Zahm: Focus on the additional requirements that larger institutional
investors have, while maintaining the practices that enable you to succeed
at a smaller size.
Richard Wilson: That’s a great piece of advice. I think many times managers
are hesitant to make large changes to their processes if they feel like it is
going to slow them down or get in the way of how they have operatedsuccessfully in the past. Do you have an example of this?
Richard Zahm: Compliance and due diligence material and documentation
might not seem relevant early on, but having the processes in place that
can prove performance are the costs of admission as the fund grows. It’s
a heavy burden for a small fund and it won’t always be attributable tooperations, but keep with it.
Richard Wilson: Great, thanks for that suggestion. This is valuable to just
about every emerging manager right now who is planning to keep up withfurther regulatory developments.
From the perspective of working in a very large hedge fund, what do
small hedge funds not realize, which you could share as a lesson, tip, orstrategy that would help them secure far more investments from institu-
tional investors than they may be receiving now?Giant Hedge Funds 113
Richard Zahm: From the start, identify which institutional lenders are even
in a position to invest in small funds. Many are proscribed from investingin funds below a certain size, or in making investments smaller than a
given amount that could represent too large a position in a fund. From
there, determine if there is a familiarity with the strategy the fund is using
and how there might be a ﬁt.
Richard Wilson: I think that hits on a very common frustration in the indus-
try: that smaller funds cannot become larger because most of the capitalis being sent to the funds that are already above a certain threshold, such
as $100 million. Any other advice in regard to marketing to institutional
investors?
Richard Zahm: Yes, also recognize the very, very slow pace that many
institutional investors often have. They’re under constraints themselves.
Provide information to them in the format they want.
Richard Wilson: Great. I think this is overlooked, and many managers can
spoil a potential partnership by checking in every three days regardingprogress or status of a potential allocation or due diligence questionnaire
(DDQ) process. In my experience, the sales cycle for a large institutional
investor is 12 to 16 months or more. You will be sending the wrong signalsand moving away from having a solid relationship with the potential
investor if you are a pest.
What group of institutional investors do you see as having a very strong
long-term interest in hedge funds, and where do you see some slack
in demand in terms of allocations to hedge funds over the next 5 to
10 years?
Richard Zahm: ABL funds will continue to attract investors seeking steady,
uncorrelated returns using a simple, transparent model. They will be ap-
pealing to more patient money allocations, taking on more of a hybridprivate equity (PE)/hedge fund structure.
Richard Wilson: So you believe that unique, transparent, simple models will
grow in assets much more quickly than competitors who work in a more
complex or black-box type environment?
Richard Zahm: Yes, I do.Richard Wilson: For those who want to grow to over $1 billion in assets
under management (AUM), what are your top ﬁve tips for hedge fund
managers who have less than $100 million in assets under managementbut would like to improve the institutional quality of their fund?
Richard Zahm: My advice would be to focus in on:
1.Transparency.
2.Prominence in the industry.114 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
3.Innovation.
4.Consistency.
5.Investor communications.
Richard Wilson: Very valuable—this whole book could be on those ﬁve ideas
only and be worth a lot to many fund managers today. We have touched
on transparency in many places in this book; it is more important than
ever. Also, prominence in the industry, or authority positioning , as I like
to call it, is something that I speak on but haven’t heard many managers
mention. I think that more than 90 percent of hedge funds are started
based on portfolio management and trading expertise and not on capital-raising or marketing abilities. This leads many hedge funds to be very
detailed in their risk management, trading, and investment processes but
light on public relations, investor databases, investor relationship man-
agement, investor communications, and authority positioning. This means
that many of the skills and practices of the manager may go unnoticed.
One last comment to what you just said, the importance of consistency:
Often institutional investors will knock managers off of a short list if their
average holding time, volatility, team, position sizes, liquidity, returns,investment process, operations, or risk management processes are not
consistent. From their point of view, input hopefully equals output, and
if the input is changed in a completely positive way, it can be seen as anunknown variable that the investor does not want to take a chance with.
Typically, managers I have worked with only learn of this after losing
some mandates for these types of reasons.
What have you learned not to do, or what have you stopped doing
related to trading or operations that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position as a
high-quality fund management business? Any lessons or tips to share on
this point?
Richard Zahm: Tight focus on lending discipline. Constantly relate local
market conditions to macro elements. Closely monitor related segments:
local and regional institutional lenders.
Richard Wilson: I think this is related to consistency once again, consis-
tently performing those activities to stay on target. Besides AUM, what
do you believe is most important for a hedge fund to focus on improving
when thinking about institutionalizing a hedge fund? Risk management?
Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
Richard Zahm: In the end, it all comes down to consistent performance over
the long term. Other elements will be listed as being critical, and theyshould be addressed. But in the end it all comes down to doing what you
say you’re going to do, and being responsive to investors.Giant Hedge Funds 115
Richard Wilson: How has your ﬁrm gotten past the “under $100 million, no
institutional-quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smallerinvestors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?
Any lessons learned here?
Richard Zahm: Institutional quality has been less of an issue. Size is the
hurdle. Small investors have a number of advantages. They’re loyal,
they listen, and, most important, they’re only answering to themselves.
Redemption requests are linked to the performance of the fund, not theunderperformance of other funds. Smaller investors wanting full redemp-
tion, for example, don’t have the same impact as large investors wanting
to cash out all at once.
Richard Wilson: What are the top three resources or tools that you use to
run your hedge fund that are worth more than anything else? What are
the most valuable resources that you could recommend to others?
Richard Zahm: The network of bankers, attorneys, brokers, and other fund
managers provide the most critical tools. The network provides deal ﬂow,and it also provides a window to what’s happening outside of the imme-
diate loan and investment opportunities. Properly used, it also supplies
a backstop on assumptions, something that can become distorted in thefocus on details.
Richard Wilson: How important do you think service providers are to the
success of your fund? What process have you used to select these service
providers and what lessons have you learned about working with both
large and small service providers that your ﬁrm has worked with? You do
not have to use any names of individual ﬁrms—generic advice is ﬁne.
Richard Zahm: Service providers have traditionally played a minor, an-
cillary role in our segment due to the simplicity of our model and the
transparency of operations. Because of the relatively low velocity of indi-vidual investments, quarterly investor letters and annual audits have been
sufﬁcient.
Richard Wilson: In other sections of this book, many fund managers have
talked about how important service providers are to their fund. Can you
explain your perspective further?
Richard Zahm: Size of service providers is less important than their famil-
iarity with our industry segment. Size, in fact, actually worked against us:
Inferior services were provided at higher cost. In exchange for workingwith a provider with broad name recognition, we were saddled with less
skilled junior personnel. We ended up teaching them our business, while
paying for the privilege.
Richard Wilson: That’s a great case study example of the downside of work-
ing with the largest of service providers. I have experienced this same116 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
trouble while working with very large service providers. I think there is
a difference between a service provider with niche knowledge and an ex-perienced team versus a giant of a ﬁrm that hires 100 new professionals
each year. So you would suggest that really examining the team of the
service provider is key?
Richard Zahm: Sorting out the claims of proﬁciency versus actual capability
is key.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other pieces of advice related to opera-
tional hedge fund best practices that you could share with other managers
in the industry?
Richard Zahm: Always keep in mind that you’re a small business. Even if
the AUM is enormous, basic start-up considerations remain.
Richard Wilson: Great advice—at least a third of the questions I get relate
to running a small business as a hedge fund manager. Many times hedge
funds aren’t described or analyzed as small businesses but they are in fact
just that.
What is the most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-
month operations? How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What
tools have you found that help you manage this?
Richard Zahm: We’ve gone from a dependable, steady-state environment to
one that’s witnessing a dramatic loss of equity over a short period of time.
Richard Wilson: What speciﬁc changes has that brought to how you operate?
Richard Zahm: Investment models that have stood the test of time have been
put into question and are demanding new approaches and the incorpora-
tion of skills that were earlier separate.
Richard Wilson: Can you give us an example?
Richard Zahm: Bridge lending, mezzanine lending, and equity investment
are now intermingled with workouts, turnarounds, and development.Models that were geared to go forward are grinding in reverse, and we
have to contend not only with market changes but with the new role
being played by the government, all while the larger fund regulation
model is being modiﬁed. We’re in the crosshairs of regulators coming
to grips not just with mortgage lending but with banking and investorrelations.
The tools are pretty straightforward. It comes down to obtaining and
processing information, information that ranges from market to regula-tory, local to macro. It’s sophisticated, and changes come on what seem
to be a daily basis. That said, the opportunities are enormous for those
with the right combination of talent, expertise, and investment.
Richard Wilson: Thank you for all of this valuable information provided
here today—we appreciate your time invested here.
Richard Zahm: No problem, thank you.Giant Hedge Funds 117
SCOTT COHEN, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
HEDGE SOLUTIONS
Our next short interview is with Scott Cohen, president and CEO of Hedge
Solutions, a Los Angeles–based fund administrator that also offers back-
ofﬁce consulting services to small and large hedge funds. Scott has workedwith numerous hedge fund managers over his career and has seen ﬁrsthand
funds grow quickly, stagnate, and even close down. Over time he has picked
up some trends, best practices, and lessons to share with managers in theindustry.
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you see hedge funds
picking up that are somewhat new to the industry as a whole but have
existed in the largest of hedge funds for some time?
Scott Cohen: In light of recent fraud activity in the industry and the desire for
greater oversight by the federal government, fund managers are starting toadapt by addressing a greater need for transparency. The tone at the top
is still as important as ever, as it is ultimately up to management to ensure
that operations are structured to meet the needs of the marketplace. Forexample, information sharing through periodic investor communications,
such as newsletters and investor web sites, allows hedge funds to provide
some background on fund performance. Additionally, investor web sitesallow investors real-time and convenient access to account information;
not only can an investor access his capital balance but also current news,
audit reports, and K-1s. Some fund managers hold routine conference
calls to update clients, which also provide an opportunity for investors to
ask questions. Performance statistics and attribution analysis posted on
the web site are shared by managers with their investors on an ongoingbasis.
Richard Wilson: The one piece I picked out there that is not often put into
practice is the routine conference calls with investors. Most hedge funds
I have met with less than $250 million in assets do not host these calls,
and instead handle all communications on an individual basis. I think that
offering such transparency to the team and chief investment ofﬁcer is a
good way to keep the lines of communication open in both directions.
Based on the best practices of $1 billion-plus hedge funds and fast-
growing hedge funds, where do you believe most fund managers should
be reinvesting their money?
Scott Cohen: Hedge funds should be directing their efforts and resources
toward capturing and reporting information that is meaningful to their
investors, while also being mindful of the current and potential regu-
latory requirements of the investment adviser. Middle- and back-ofﬁce118 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
operations, though essential to the overall effectiveness of the organiza-
tion, are often overlooked. Most hedge funds use third-party administra-tors and rely on them to accurately report the ﬁnancial results of the fund
and each partner. By shadowing the administrator, the hedge fund will
be able to provide added review on the administrator and any reporting
issues can be addressed effectively.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds
implementing that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Scott Cohen: Every hedge fund needs to consider internal controls and reg-
ulatory compliance. Funds smaller than $1 billion don’t always consider
instituting proper compliance programs, but compliance is ever more crit-ical in today’s environment. Regulatory bodies expect fund managers to
implement and monitor their compliance effectively. Moreover, institu-
tional investors now expect fund managers to have formal compliance
programs and strict internal controls, yet this is one area that small funds
ignore as they continue to target smaller clients that may lack institutionalinvestors. With the industry evolving toward stricter regulation, one way
for smaller funds to achieve a competitive advantage is to implement
stricter compliance mechanisms such as leveraging the use of their currentadministrator or using an outsourced compliance service.
Richard Wilson: Almost every hedge fund manager I know would like to
become a $1 billion-plus fund, for obvious reasons. Where should these
managers now invest money if they are already growing quickly and
gaining assets rapidly?
Scott Cohen: Hedge fund managers who are experiencing quick growth are
obviously aware of the need to gain better information in order to achieve
alpha. However, they are not always aware of the importance of ensuring
operational needs such as internal trade reconciliation with the broker andadequate record keeping. As the investment adviser grows, middle- and
back-ofﬁce requirements also expand. Hedge fund managers need to be
certain that internal compliance programs are robust enough to integrate
shifting staff roles and growth due to new hires. Along the same lines,
portfolio risk systems and back-ofﬁce systems must be implemented so asto manage the company’s business risk.
Richard Wilson: Where do you see hedge funds slowing down their own
growth due to lack of resources or skills? What mistakes do you see beingmade by very fast-growing $100 million-plus funds?
Scott Cohen: Very fast-growing $100 million-plus funds experience prob-
lems when they deviate from their principles on the portfolio. As man-agement of the portfolio shifts from one investment strategy to another
in order to make up the losses incurred in the portfolio, the potential forGiant Hedge Funds 119
further losses occurs. More often than not, over the long term, a minor
enhancement to the original investment strategy yields better results thanabandoning it. Another area of difﬁculty is lack of objectivity and proper
due diligence in the investment made. This could be caused in part by lack
of requisite skills. Sometimes investors will fully redeem from a particular
fund if they perceive that the fund manager is not addressing their needs
from a reporting perspective or not communicating effectively.
Richard Wilson: True. I also believe that a risk just as dangerous as poor per-
formance is coming across as inconsistent over time. If you have changed
your investment process once or twice, what may stop you from changing
it again? If you produced returns with one set of tools through up anddown markets, can we really trust that you can do the same now with a
larger team, and a so-called upgraded investment process?
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of investment research versus
investment processes, please type this URL into your Web browser:
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Research
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter provides some lessons and direct insights from how large
$1 billion-plus hedge funds are operated. Some key lessons from this chapter
include the following:
/squaresolidSmall hedge funds have a more granular feel of individual positions,
while larger funds make more strategic long-term decisions and have a
different focus.
/squaresolidLarger funds are typically able to diversify investments across a larger
pool of assets, especially within hard asset and large capital requirement
areas.
/squaresolidMany large hedge fund managers have learned to keep their diversity
model in place the hard way. It is tempting to run with what seems to
be working instead of diversifying your investments.120 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
/squaresolidStrong internal controls, compliance procedures, and risk reporting are
things that large hedge funds have in place that most small hedge fundsstruggle with.
/squaresolidIt is recommended that to compete with the largest of hedge funds, youshould pay attention to investor requirements for large investors withoutlosing sight of what made you a successful small or medium-size hedge
fund.
/squaresolidTo help compete against giant hedge funds and emulate their success,
Richard Zahm suggests focusing on transparency, prominence within
the industry, innovation, consistency, and investor communications.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: Scott Cohen states in this chapter that he doesn’t believe
that the “tone at the top” is important any longer as ﬁnancial controlsand compliance processes have taken the front stage within the hedge
fund industry.
2.True or false: A risk just as big as poor performance is appearing and
acting inconsistent over time.
3.Richard Zahm suggests that even when you are managing $800 million
or $1 billion,
still apply.
a.Business negotiation tactics.
b.Business start-up considerations.
c.Capital-raising best practices.
4.A lesson to take away from large hedge fund operations is that the size
of a hedge fund service provider does not always determine the quality
of service; the most important thing to consider is .
a.How they work with other service providers.
b.How familiar they are with your strategy.
c.How many years they have been in business.
d.How familiar they are already with your team.
5.In this chapter it is suggested that the advantages of building a large
$1 billion fund based on smaller investors include all of the following
except:
a.Loyalty.
b.They listen.
c.They are only answering to themselves.
d.They complete due diligence more quickly.
6.True or false: To stay in the forefront of the mind of potential investors,
it is a best practice of very large hedge funds to check in on the status
of due diligence processes every three to four days.Giant Hedge Funds 121
7.True or false: In this chapter it is suggested that you forget about being
an authority on your subject and your prominence in the industry, andfocus instead on having high-quality ﬁnancial controls, infrastructure,
and institutional-quality operations in place.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 8
Governance Best Practices
Excellence is an art won by training and habituation. We do not
act rightly because we have virtue or excellence, but we rather
have those because we have acted rightly. We are what we
repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit.
—Aristotle
This chapter provides an interview-based overview of fund governance andthe ways in which many hedge funds are creating more robust checks and
balances in their own fund operations to prevent abuse and create a more
sustainable business at the same time.
Why important : Fund governance is by far the most consistently ignored
part of running a hedge fund as a real business. Every year the importance of
having strong governance procedures in place grows, and we see no slowing
down or potential reversal of this trend.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund governance best practices and
practical strategies, please type this URL into your Web browser:
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Governance
Fund governance is a valuable area to learn more about because most
funds have relatively weak internal controls, independent boards, and checks
and balance systems in place. Most funds are focused ﬁrst on managing their
123The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 124 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
portfolio and second on raising capital; operational issues or governance
procedures are often afterthoughts or formalities.
Lately the hedge fund industry has been marred by cases of fraud. In
some cases individual employees of a hedge fund committed acts which
placed the hedge fund manager’s business in jeopardy. If you don’t have
these governance procedures in place, you may be opening the door for a
future employee to commit such acts. No internal control or structure can
completely prevent fraud or abuse, but it can help—and it can also showinvestors that you have reinvested in the stability of your own business.
ANDREW MAIN, MANAGING PARTNER, STRATTON
STREET CAPITAL LLP
Our team recently completed an in-depth interview with Andrew Main,
managing partner at Stratton Street Capital LLP. Andrew has been a key
participant in placing strong corporate governance rules in place since the
inception of the funds under management. His team has picked up manybest practices and processes which may aide other hedge fund managers or
investors who are seeking to better understand this concept.
Richard Wilson: Why have you personally taken such a strong interest in
implementing strong corporate governance procedures?
Andrew Main: Lessons of the past two years have shown that strong in-
dependent oversight of a hedge fund should be an important step in aninvestor’s due diligence regarding how a fund is run. As the hedge fund
community matures, institutional investors will more and more want to
see their interests not only aligned with the manager’s but also overseenby a strong independent board. In turn, the board may introduce new
opportunities to the investment manager or adviser in attracting investors
to the fund through their introductions and role in the process.
We are currently living and working through a very dynamic time. As
our industry increasingly becomes more institutionalized it moves awayfrom its reliance on a leveraged high net worth (HNW) client investor
base. Many funds will have also learned the lesson of relying too heavily
on the fund of funds sector but will want to attract institutional capital
directly. One of the roles of the fund of funds as the institutional investor’s
gatekeeper was to act as their eyes and ears on what was actually going
on in the fund or in the fund’s investment management company. Recentevents have shown that in many cases this reliance has not actually been
executed. Therefore small boutique funds and managers can easily adoptGovernance Best Practices 125
high corporate governance standards that will put many larger managers
to shame. The problem then is how does the institutional investor learnabout the manager and his funds?
Richard Wilson: How many board members should there be on a single
board?
Andrew Main: Our board has consisted of four to six members at any one
time. A diverse board is more valuable than a homogenous one.
Richard Wilson: Can you provide an example of how this has affected
potential investors who are completing due diligence on your funds?
Andrew Main: Several years ago we were going through a day’s due diligence
with a large institutional investor looking to open a managed accountwith us. It happened to coincide with the quarterly visit from one of the
fund’s independent board members making his own due diligence review.
We therefore suggested the two meet and sit down together and talk
alone about us as a manager, in our ofﬁce. The institutional investor who
had spent several hours asking many penetrating questions was lost forwords. He openly admitted never having had the opportunity to meet a
nonexecutive director of a fund, and said that as a result, he did not know
what to ask!
Richard Wilson: Let’s start with the basics. What is the purpose of the fund
board?
Andrew Main: To collectively be responsible for the central control of the
fund by overseeing the affairs of the appropriate interests of the sharehold-
ers and relevant stakeholders while at all times ensuring the protection of
investors.
Richard Wilson: Can you go into greater detail on exactly what responsi-
bilities the board should hold and what their role is? Maybe something
granular enough that hedge fund managers reading this could think aboutconstructing their own board?
Andrew Main: Sure. First off, all directors need to recognize their collec-
tive responsibility for the statutory obligations of the fund as well as
the strategic, ﬁnancial, and key personnel matters and focus strongly on
the correct delegation, supervision, reporting, monitoring, and control re-sponsibilities of the board. So the ﬁrst three categories of primary duties
are statutory obligations, strategic review, and business and compliance
review.
1.Statutory obligations may include such varied matters as:
a.Preparation of prospectus and constitutional documents; review
and approval of annual report and accounts, ﬁnal dividend, circu-
lars to shareholders, and listing particulars and requirements.126 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
b.Interim report and accounts and the returns to regulators and stock
exchanges.
c.Compliance with listing rules and their continuing obligations.
d.Monitoring of marketing activities.
e.Equal treatment of shareholders.
f.Accountability to shareholders and responsibility to relevant stake-
holders.
2.Strategic review. As part of the exercise, we regard it as best practice
to review once a year (we do it at the time of signing off full audited
accounts) that the fund, through the execution of its investment policy,
has not strayed from its vision and mission as set out in the prospectus.It has a clear vision of its forward-going strategy and future develop-
ment. It is also a good idea to review where it has come in the past
year, especially measured against its peer group.
3.Business and compliance review. As an independent board, it is very
important that each board member looks at the fund through a dif-ferent set of eyes. In an ideal world it is useful to have independent
directors who bring fund management, administrative, legal, account-
ing, and shareholder experience to a fund. It is not necessary for theinvestment manager or adviser to be on the board, as they may simply
attend and report to the board, thus ensuring preservation of indepen-
dence. However, the board must be able to look at their activities and
decide on the appointment and review of the service providers of all
functions to the fund.
This review should include, on an annual basis, the fund company secre-
tary, investment manager, investment adviser, administrator, prime bro-
ker, and/or custodian. They should also review the work of the fundauditors, lawyers, and other independent professional advisers such as
outside risk monitoring or third-party marketers of the fund. The board
should review its annual directors and ofﬁcers liability insurance to ensure
its adequacy to protect all interested parties. It may decide, depending on
their complexity, to delegate some of these functions to internal or exter-
nal committees. The board should also review the overall compliance of
the fund to fulﬁll its functions and that all its statutory duties have been
fulﬁlled.
Richard Wilson: Could you summarize in a more concise way what the
high-level duties of board members are?
Andrew Main: Sure. Their primary duties are statutory obligations, strategic
and ﬁnancial matters, key man matters, reporting monitoring and control
responsibilities, annual review of composition and effectiveness of the
board, and corporate governance.Governance Best Practices 127
Richard Wilson: Now, for those who are either sitting on boards or are
thinking about improving their board, what types of activities speciﬁcallydo board members complete each year?
Andrew Main: Well, these activities span across many areas, but here is
a bullet-point list of many of the responsibilities our board members
take on:
/squaresolidDevelopment and measuring against the company’s vision and mission.
/squaresolidStrategy of development plan and progress in achieving that plan.
/squaresolidSigniﬁcant changes in accounting policy.
/squaresolidApproval of risk management guidelines.
/squaresolidStatutory obligations such as monitoring of marketing activities and
investor relations procedures.
/squaresolidSufﬁcient and timely ﬁnancial information and reports provided to the
board.
/squaresolidAppointment and review of key service providers such as the primebroker, custodian, administrator, or third-party marketer.
/squaresolidEnsuring adequate resources are in place for ongoing operations.
/squaresolidDelegation of board powers to ad hoc committees as needed to addresscritical issues.
/squaresolidEnsuring internal controls and procedures are in place and are adequate.
/squaresolidObtaining appropriate and timely information to fulﬁll their obliga-tions.
/squaresolidReview of all internal and external audit and compliance reports and
associated regulatory reviews by third parties.
/squaresolidEnsuring that a satisfactory compliance regime exists and that all rel-
evant local and international laws, procedures, guidance notes, and
controls to combat money laundering, terrorist ﬁnancing, and other
criminal activities are upheld.
Richard Wilson: That seems like more work and implementation than some
hedge funds may be willing to do, especially if they are an emergingmanager with a new fund.
Andrew Main: In adopting such a structure, it may give the investors comfort
that their interests are being protected. The amount and depth of oversight
will obviously vary with the development of the fund. It is important not to
overload the total expense ratio of the fund with too many wise men but to
have sufﬁcient to carry out the basics in the early days of the fund. As thefund matures and we become much more involved in a world dominated
by regulatory and investor oversight, the fund needs to demonstrate its
strengths to act independently. However, it must not become too bogged128 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
down in latest fashions but maintain a standard in the best interest of
shareholders and stakeholders.
Richard Wilson: The board oversees many activities. Can you summarize to
whom the board members are ultimately responsible?
Andrew Main: The board has ultimate responsibility to the shareholder,
relevant stakeholders, their regulator (if regulated), oversight of the out-
sourced services of the fund, and oversight of the investment manager and
the fund.
Richard Wilson: What other advice could you give about properly construct-
ing a board?
Andrew Main: I would suggest, as I mentioned earlier, looking for comple-
mentary, diverse skill sets. For example, one of our past boards consisted
of a former accountant, a managing director from a bank, an adviser on
the topic of corporate governance, and a country adviser specialist. This
team was able to help us not only manage our corporate governance but
constantly improve it over time as well.
Richard Wilson: Many times when I hear hedge funds discuss corporate
governance, the purpose of the board can seem fuzzy, and I believe this
may sometimes lead to putting off decisions on forming a board or havinga very active board that really oversees the activities of the fund. What
would be a concise way to describe the key purpose of the board?
Andrew Main: To collectively be responsible for maximizing the company’s
success by directing and supervising the affairs of the business and meeting
the appropriate interests of the shareholders and relevant stakeholders
while enhancing the value of the fund and ensuring protection of investors.
Richard Wilson: Could you provide some guidance on board meetings, how
should they be conducted and structured to be effective?
Andrew Main: We hold quarterly meetings and the fund manager/adviser is
always present at these meetings. During the meeting we review the fund
and its activities, go over the list of shareholders, and conduct corporate
governance reviews.
Richard Wilson: In this model some power is taken away from the fund
manager and placed with the board members. How do you monitor theirparticipation to ensure they are fulﬁlling their duties?
Andrew Main: We have the board assess whether members need to be
replaced. We allow in-person or over-the-phone participation by boardmembers but expect and have the majority of meetings attended in person.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any closing thoughts before we wrap
this up?
Andrew Wilson: A well-functioning board is an excellent trustee and a great
resource to all interested parties. Take the time to set up the board theGovernance Best Practices 129
right way and it will work for you over the long term. Make sure and use
the board in your due diligence processes.
Richard Wilson: Oftentimes there are references to nonexecutive advisory
boards or independent boards. Can you explain what the term nonexec-
utive really means?
Andrew Main: The majority of board members are the nonexecs. In fact, we
do not have any fund managers on our boards. We want the fund man-
agers to report their activity to the board so there can be both integrationand independence between the two groups. That further shows the split
in roles. We feel that the board members should bring a different view
of the fund so we try and have people from different backgrounds—anindependent market professional, a lawyer, accountant, administrator,
and so on. A nonexecutive does not form part of the executive manage-
ment of the fund manager or the funds investment decisions but performs
a role of central control of the fund through roles of scrutiny, construc-
tive comment on development, ascertaining that risk controls are robustenough and ﬁnancial data accurate, and so on.
Richard Wilson: I have seen in some of your speeches on governance best
practices that you discuss the importance of “board packs.” Could youexplain what these are exactly?
Andrew Main: A board pack is collated by the fund administrator and is sent
out in advance of the meeting to be reviewed by the board of directors.
The topics in our last pack were:
/squaresolidApologies and appointment of alternates.
/squaresolidQuorum.
/squaresolidDirectors’ interests.
/squaresolidMinutes of last meeting and any committee meetings (audit, etc.).
/squaresolidMatters arising.
/squaresolidReview of ﬁnancial statements (we reviewed our interims).
/squaresolidManager’s report.
/squaresolidFund manager reviews.
/squaresolidMarketing review.
/squaresolidCorporate governance review.
/squaresolidAnnual review of prospectus.
/squaresolidAdministrators’ report which includes report of the administrator, com-
pliance review of designated manager and custodian, company’s secre-
tary review, stock exchange notices for listing of funds, and continuing
obligations.
/squaresolidFuture dates of meetings.
/squaresolidAny other business.130 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: Great, that is helpful. Can you reveal some of the costs
associated with building this type of independent board?
Andrew Main: Overall cost of the meetings will be part of the administration
cost plus directors’ fees and expenses for attending the meeting. I would
think you should be looking at $15,000 per annum fees upward per
director. Hence, as part of the administration cost, we do review the total
expense ratio of the fund, and so on.
DAVID R. KOENIG, CEO OF THE GOVERNANCE
FUND, LLC
The second interview we completed for this chapter of the book was with
David R. Koenig, CEO of the Governance Fund, LLC, an investment man-
ager which, in their words, “seeks to capture the hidden performance gapbetween publicly traded companies that are well-governed and those which
are poorly governed.” I thought this was an interesting strategy, because
in studying what good and poor governance mean they would be able to
explain some of the importance of having it in place and what that means
to investors.
Here is a brief history of David’s professional experience: David R.
Koenig is the founder and chief executive ofﬁcer of The Governance Fund,
LLC. His work in risk management and governance is internationally recog-
nized. Prior to founding The Governance Fund, LLC, Mr. Koenig served as
chair of the board and executive director of the Professional Risk Managers’
International Association (PRMIA) and president of the PRMIA Institute.
In 2008, he was bestowed PRMIA’s top honor, the Higher Standard Award,
for his contributions to the global risk profession. He was also named as one
of the ﬁrst 100 members of the Risk Who’s Who International HonorarySociety, a select group of individuals who have inﬂuenced the international
practice of risk management.
Richard Wilson: Let’s start at the top: Why is strong governance an impor-
tant thing for both hedge funds and corporations to have in place?
David R. Koenig: The quality of an organization’s governance affects its
value in three main ways. First, well-governed organizations make betterdecisions, which leads to expectations of better growth. Second, well-
governed ﬁrms have imbedded resilience and the ability to change as con-
ditions in an industry or asset class change. Witness the many high-proﬁle,abrupt endings to ﬁnancial service companies during the 2007–2009 ﬁ-
nancial crisis. Well-governed companies are resilient, ductile, and complex
adaptive systems. In response to stresses, they bend, but don’t break. TheirGovernance Best Practices 131
strength provides them the opportunity to adjust to new realities. They
reform and they remain strong.
Third, investors will more greatly discount their expectations of future
earnings for poorly governed companies because they represent a higher
risk of surprises. Work in psychology and behavioral ﬁnance has shown
that people have a strong drive for loss avoidance. They fear large losses
much more than they value large gains. In fact, the dislike of large losses
has been valued at more than two times the desire for gains. So compa-nies that present investors with the possibility of large losses are assigned
higher discount rates by the investors. As noted earlier, poorly governed
companies are more likely to be subject to large, surprise losses. In somecases, those surprise losses will end their existence. Well-governed com-
panies, however, can come to be perceived as presenting a lower risk of
large, surprise losses, and their value increases due to their lower discount
factor applied to their future earnings.
Richard Wilson: So basically, having strong governance in place helps the
organization avoid pitfalls and avoid closing down due to operational
business missteps as well?
David R. Koenig: In short, good governance adds value; poor governance
detracts from it.
Richard Wilson: Can you provide us with some governance factors you
look at in corporations that could also be assessed by investors looking at
hedge fund governance structures?
David R. Koenig: Sure. From a structural standpoint, some of these factors
include:
/squaresolidChairman/CEO separation.
/squaresolidBoard composition.
/squaresolidOfﬁce turnover.
/squaresolidLate ﬁlings.
/squaresolidChange in external auditing.
/squaresolidShareholder controls.
From an accounting and forensics standpoint—in other words, how
companies “live” their governance—some factors include:
/squaresolidAccrued expenses.
/squaresolidDeferred taxes.
/squaresolidLate ﬁlings.
/squaresolidExtraordinary expenses.
/squaresolidActuarial assumptions related to pension liabilities.132 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: While governance is something that most fund managers
agree is important to have in place, how come more hedge fund managersdo not already have these practices in place?
David R. Koenig: The difference may stem from whether you view your
company as a business, or just a trading strategy. If the former, you have
a very different perspective on your relationship to your customers. Good
governance happens when the process of decision making and implemen-
tation is accountable, transparent, responsive, effective, and efﬁcient. Itdoesn’t happen by accident—it only works when it is a priority and it is
intentional. You have such an intention when you focus on the needs of
your customers ﬁrst.
Richard Wilson: Everyone in the hedge fund industry talks about the need for
“increased transparency,” but beside the use of separate accounts, what
types of processes or access can hedge fund managers provide investors
to increase their level of transparency?
David R. Koenig: Clients have a right to understand what is being done with
their funds, both in terms of the strategies being pursued and the risks
being taken. Without transparency to positions and trades, it is difﬁcult
for investors to have complete conﬁdence that their investment mandateis being adhered to, or that their expectations are being met. Therefore,
transparency of all positions and trades taken by The Governance Fund,
LLC, on behalf of a client is available via two methods designed to protect
the proprietary nature of the process we use.
Investors who are willing to sign a nondisclosure agreement with an
intellectual property clause related to the reverse-engineering of strategiescan have complete transparency with respect to all positions and all trans-
actions on a daily basis. Alternatively, without any additional agreements,
all investors in the funds that we manage are given full transparency onall positions and all trades, ﬁve times per year, on any day they choose.
Using these methods, we as the investment manager provide investors in
the fund with the appropriate transparency to our operations.
In addition to these two views into the positions, we have created a
Governance and Risk Management Advisory Board, composed of inter-nationally recognized leaders in risk management, governance, and ﬁ-
nance. They meet quarterly to review the risk management and governance
of The Governance Fund, LLC, and the minutes of their meeting related tothis review are made available to all investors in the funds that we manage.
This is something distinctive in the investment management ﬁeld.
Richard Wilson: Over the past three years there have been many discussions
about hedge funds readjusting their management and performance fee
calculations to take a more long-term interest alongside the investor. The
argument is that if a hedge fund manager could potentially take on a largeGovernance Best Practices 133
amount of risk with other people’s money, they may do so to aim for a
$100 million-plus payday. What has your ﬁrm put into place to align theﬁnancial incentives of your fund more closely with your investors?
David R. Koenig: Our annual management fees range from 0.5 percent
to 2.0 percent of beginning period assets under management (AUM).
Management fees are maximized when we do well. If we don’t perform,
we give some of our fees back to the customer via a reduced management
fee. “Doing well” means hitting both our return and risk targets.
Similarly, incentive fees are earned only after we pass a hurdle rate.
When they are earned, rather than being paid in cash, they are paid in
fund interests with a hard lock for two years from the date of payment.This further aligns the manager’s interests with those of our investors.
In addition, incentive fees are capped to prevent any conﬂicting incentive
toward excessive risk taking. An example is the following table, which
comes from two of the funds we have been engaged to manage.
Hurdle Rateof ReturnShare of
ExcessRate of Return
Cap forIncentive Fee
CalculationsEffective Cap on
Incentive Fees
Relative
Return
Strategy2.0% above
the index50% 8.0% above the
index3% of beginning
of period AUM
Absolute
Return
Strategy5.0% 30% 15% 3% of beginning
of period AUM
Richard Wilson: Others have also stressed the importance of using trusted
service providers who have expertise and a history of client relationships
in the hedge fund space. Do you agree with this approach?
David R. Koenig: Separation of duties and the engagement of leading service
providers are essential elements to an operationally sound and successful
control environment. We agree wholeheartedly.
Richard Wilson: Would you agree with me that hedge funds need to be
considering strong governance as a must-have instead of a nice-to-have in
today’s marketplace?
David R. Koenig: Effective corporate governance, while complex, is essential
to the long-range success of any organization. Again, if you recognize that
you are running a business, whose key asset is its clients, then the answerbecomes clear.134 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter we discuss some governance best practices that hedge funds
can follow to improve their decision making, capital-raising abilities, and,
most importantly, risk management environment. Some key lessons from
this chapter include the following:
/squaresolidMany small to medium-size hedge funds have poor internal ﬁnancial
controls, and few have independent boards that take the perspective of
the investor in all decisions.
/squaresolidThe main purpose of an independent board for a hedge fund is to col-lectively be responsible for the central control of the fund by overseeingthe affairs of the appropriate interests of the shareholders and relevant
stakeholders while at all times ensuring protection of the investors.
/squaresolidThe board’s primary duties are statutory obligations, strategic and ﬁ-
nancial matters, personnel matters, report monitoring and control re-
sponsibilities, annual review of composition and effectiveness of the
board, and corporate governance.
/squaresolidEmploying hedge fund governance best practices not only protects your
business from some types of operational and fraud risks, but it also
helps position your ﬁrm when marketing, and it improves decision-making processes.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.No internal control structure can .
a.Completely prevent fraud.
b.Assure investors positive ﬁnancial returns.
c.Protect the capital within a hedge fund.
2.True or false: One of the reasons why fund governance is becoming
more important is that funds of hedge funds were somewhat seen as
the eyes and ears of smaller investors, but they have recently failed to
conduct adequate due diligence and research.
3.Andrew Main suggests that a board should complete a strategic review
once a .
a.Month.
b.Quarter.
c.Year.
4.True or false: Independent boards of advisers should be constructed of
one type of professionals: forensic accounting and audit professionals.Governance Best Practices 135
This type of professional will always serve both the fund and investors
best.
5.It is suggested in this chapter that board meetings be conducted at least
once per .
a.Week.
b.Month.
c.Quarter.
d.Year.
6.What does it mean to have a nonexecutive board of advisers?
a.To have a board made up of professionals in other industries who
bring a unique view of the business.
b.To have a board made up of junior-level professionals with unique
perspectives on improving business operations.
c.To have a board which is made up of professionals who do not
also serve as portfolio managers or executives within the day-to-day
running of the fund.
7.The cost of building a good board should probably be around
per director on the board.
a.$8,500
b.$15,000
c.$22,500
d.$25,000
8.Good governance ; poor governance .
a.Costs lots of money, doesn’t cost much.
b.Is rare, is very common.
c.Adds value, detracts from it.
9.True or false: David R. Koenig believes that while good governance is
nice to have, it is not essential to the long-term success of a hedge fund.
10. Poorly governed funds are more likely to have surprise
.
a.Large, losses.
b.Small, losses.
c.Large, gains.
d.Small, gains.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 9
Frequently Asked Hedge
Fund Questions
You are your greatest asset. Put your time, effort, and money into
training, grooming, and encouraging your greatest asset.
—Tom Hopkins
This chapter covers the most frequently asked questions about hedge funds.Our company receives over 150,000 e-mails each year, many of them
asking the same questions that are covered here in this chapter.
HEDGE FUNDS 101
Question: What is a hedge fund?
Answer : A hedge fund is a private investment vehicle in which investors
in the fund typically are charged a management fee plus a performance-
based fee. While this deﬁnition has been true for some time now, there
are dozens of variations of hedge funds, and many look a lot like private
equity funds and venture capital funds. While the hedge fund industry has
been organically growing in real size, it is also growing simply due to the
application of the name hedge fund to an increasing number of investment
vehicles. Typical hedge fund management fees are between 1 and 2 percent,
and typical performance fees range from 15 to 30 percent. Investors are
drawn to hedge funds because they have strong incentives to perform very
well in order to take down a large dollar ﬁgure as part of the performancefee charged by the fund. While some would say this is a light version of the
deﬁnition, the truth is that the model has expanded in so many directions
that any more details would leave out billions of dollars worth of hedge fund
137The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 138 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
strategies and models. The industry truly is deﬁned by the fees the funds now
charge and how those are structured to the investor.
Question: What is a fund of hedge funds?
Answer : A fund of hedge funds is an investment fund that allows a single
investor broad access to many different hedge funds through one investment.
The fund of hedge funds typically researches dozens or hundreds of hedge
fund managers in order to optimize and invest for clients in a basket of
well-performing hedge funds. A fund of hedge funds earns fees on top ofthe hedge fund management and performance fees already embedded in this
type of investment. Investors are drawn to funds of hedge funds for the
superior research and due diligence conducted and the diversity of hedgefund risk exposures that may be found in these vehicles.
Question: What is the difference between a multistrategy hedge fund
and a fund of hedge funds?
Answer : A multistrategy hedge fund is a fund that runs multiple strate-
gies such as long/short, 130/30, global macro, merger arbitrage, and so on,all in the same fund. This fund will typically charge a single layer of fees
similar to any other hedge fund. This contrasts with a fund of hedge funds,
which could be focused on one or two hedge fund strategies or many in a di-versiﬁed model where an additional layer of fees is applied for the research,
due diligence, and risk management research that went into constructing the
portfolio of unique hedge fund managers in the fund.
Question: What hedge fund books would you recommend reading?
Answer : We offer a free-to-download 200-plus-page e-book on hedge
funds, online at http://HedgeFundsBook.com. We also suggest visitingHedgeFundBookStore.com to review the short list of books that our team
has selected for the CHP Designation Program. We reviewed over 55
books on hedge funds before selecting this group of texts for our trainingprogram.
Question: What is the role of an institutional investment consultant?
Answer : Institutional investment consultants are investment advisers to
mainly large institutional investors such as pension funds, foundations, en-
dowments, or family ofﬁces. Investment decisions are often made with theadvice of these consultants, and sometimes parts or whole portfolios are
placed under the control and investment decision making of these insti-
tutional consultants. Hedge fund managers are typically interested in de-veloping strong relationships with institutional consultants because those
managers with over $80 million or $100 million in assets can often build
relationships with these consultants and possibly gain allocations from theirinstitutional investor clients.
Question: How strong is the industry outside of the United States and
Europe?Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 139
Answer : The hedge fund industry is diverse and spread out around
the world. Australia, Brazil, South Africa, and Russia are all hubs of CTAfund and hedge fund activity. I met with a CTA fund in S ˜ao Paulo, Brazil,
last year for lunch and he mentioned that he personally knew of over 300
funds similar to his which are based in S ˜ao Paulo. While many international
locations may lack more than a handful of $750 million-plus hedge funds,
they house thousands of small to medium-size hedge fund managers who
together control a lot of assets and hire a respectable number of employeesas well.
Question: What is the quickest way to gain more knowledge about
hedge funds right now?
Answer : Many times I hear from professionals who have been reading
HedgeFundBlogger.com, who have read this book, or who read our hedge
fund e-book and they are hungry to learn more. Here are my four top tips
on moving up the learning curve on everything hedge funds:
1.Our free 200-page hedge fund e-book (http://HedgeFundsBook.com).
2.Sign up for Google Alerts for the terms “Hedge Fund,” “Hedge Funds,”
and so on. This will allow Google to e-mail you once a week as new
Web stories or blog articles come out on hedge funds.
3.Subscribe to HedgeFundBlogger.com and receive our daily e-mail
newsletter about the hedge fund industry.
4.Subscribe to ﬁve educational blogs on the topic of hedge funds. Sug-
gestions include HedgeFundBlogger.com, Fintag.com, FT AlphaVille
(FTalphaville.ft.com), and the Albourne Village newsletter found at
Village.Albourne.com.
HEDGE FUND OPERATIONS
Question: I am a solid trader with a solid back-tested model. Should I start
a hedge fund?
Answer : The hard truth is probably not. Most traders do not have the
level of pedigree or supporting capital that is needed to launch and grow a
fund from the ground up. That said, new hedge funds are launched daily,
and many funds do make it to a proﬁtable level of assets under management
(AUM) and do very well. It is important to do your research before you spend
any money on service providers or legal formation. Work up your budget,
write a business plan, write a marketing plan, meet with potential friendsand family investors, and speak with other small hedge fund managers.
Raising capital and growing a long track record that will attract investors
both take a long time and a lot of patience.140 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Question : What is one operational fund management process you could
provide me with that I can take away and really use in my business today?I need something low cost as we manage less than $100 million in assets as
a fund.
Answer: One person who has affected me in business has been William
Edward Deming. He once said, “If you can’t describe what you are doing
as a process, you don’t know what you are doing.” I think this also goes
along with another popular business quote: “What gets documented getsimproved.”
Most investment funds and family ofﬁces that I have worked with do not
have an investor cultivation process or pipeline drawn out as a process. Theydo not have their ongoing investor communication strategy documented,
and in many places the only documentation of their investment process is
at a very high level in their marketing materials. I think many hedge funds,
portfolio managers, and capital raisers could beneﬁt from using PowerPoint
presentations or a free program such as Bubbl (www.bubbl.us) to documenttheir processes.
This documenting of critical processes takes little time and costs noth-
ing to do, but it allows you to step back from the process and evaluate it,improve it, or delegate where appropriate. Our ﬁrm recently used Bubbl and
PowerPoint together to describe a business process we were completing our-
selves, and we were able to use this not only internally but also externally as
we trained a third party to whom we decided to outsource some of this work.
The processes I have found valuable to document are:
/squaresolidInvestor acquisition process.
/squaresolidCurrent investor communication strategy.
/squaresolidHiring new employees.
/squaresolidManaging your portfolio on an ongoing basis.
Question: What exactly does a fund administration ﬁrm do? What is
the scope of their services?
Answer : A fund administration ﬁrm helps with the day-to-day opera-
tions of running a hedge fund. Activities that typical administration ﬁrms
may take on for a fund include:
/squaresolidMonthly accounting.
/squaresolidTax preparation assistance.
/squaresolidProcessing of subscriptions and redemptions.
/squaresolidThird-party controls.
/squaresolidAudit assistance.
/squaresolidAnti–money laundering (AML) compliance.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 141
/squaresolidInvestor communications.
/squaresolidDaily reconciliation of trades.
/squaresolidEmployee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) tracking.
/squaresolidOperational assistance.
/squaresolidManagement company accounting.
Question: What are your top ﬁve pieces of advice for a hedge fund that
is just now starting up?
Answer : Our ﬁrm speaks with over 300 hedge fund start-ups and emerg-
ing hedge fund managers each year. We typically hear from managers when
they need help selecting service providers such as a formation attorney orprime brokerage ﬁrm, or we get requests to help these funds raise capital for
their new funds. Here are our top ﬁve tips for hedge fund start-ups:
1.It is harder to raise capital than you think, so get all of your capital-
raising processes, investor database resources, and sales professionals in
place before you start your fund.
2.Focus on developing a unique investment process and competitive
advantage in the industry: What unique edge can you constantly bebuilding?
3.Risk management and institutionalization are key for your fund. Focus
on how to be more transparent than your competitors. Decide where
you can invest early in technology, research, or pedigree to raise the
institutional quality of your fund offering.
4.Investors want to see that you have skin in the game. Make sure you do
have some of yourself invested and communicate that to investors.
5.Face-to-face relationships work. Meet with as many potential investors,
service providers, and consultants in person as possible. This leads tomore trust, momentum, and productivity in everything you touch.
Question : Do you have any suggestions on how we could run our hedge
fund business better from an operational or business point of view so that
we are seen as more of an authority in the industry?
Answer : Sure. One way in which people are inﬂuenced every day
is through our orienting reﬂex. The orienting reﬂex is the process we
go through while reacting to something novel, new, or mysterious. It iswhat makes ﬁrst dates, roller coasters, and vacations to exotic islands so
enjoyable.
When a loud alarm goes off we stop and ask ourselves why it is going
off and whether it has any impact on us. If you are in the middle of a
movie at your local theater and the ﬁre alarm starts to go off, everyone will
look around for a minute before taking action. Each person is orienting142 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
themselves to this new situation and combination of variables, and they are
looking for instructions from other people’s actions, their past experiences,or some sort of authority such as a movie theater employee. This very
moment, while the movie audience is determining what to do next, is when
they are most easily inﬂuenced. This same rule applies to changes in stock
market conditions and the reaction of Wall Street analysts and investment
news broadcasters.
If you can be the person to suggest a strategy or provide additional
credible evidence when others are still orienting to a new environment, you
can be very inﬂuential very quickly.
You can apply this in your fund by being the ﬁrst to address an industry
development such as new investor regulations, or an industry-changing fraud
event like Madoff. Interpret these events and focus on making sense of what
will likely come next. This can be done on a smaller level with events that
come up each quarter in the industry.
Question: How can I network with other hedge fund managers and
industry professionals?
Answer : The best way to network with other hedge fund managers
and industry professionals is through the Hedge Fund Group, a free-to-join association of industry professionals. This group now has over 30,000
members from around the world, and you may join today by visiting
HedgeFundGroup.org and clicking on the “Join” link at the top right-hand
side of the home page.
HEDGE FUND MARKETING AND SALES
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a 45-minute video on hedge fund marketing best
practices, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Capital-Raising-Strategies
Question : What does a typical third-party marketing arrangement look like?
What are the payouts like?
Answer : Third-party marketing arrangements typically involve the mar-
keter receiving 20 percent of both the management and performance fees
on assets raised for ﬁve years, seven years, or in perpetuity for as long asthe investor remains invested in the fund. In addition to the fee sharing,Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 143
most third-party marketers will also charge some level of a retainer, which
can range from $1,000/month to $12,000/month, to help cover the ongoingmarketing costs of the marketer. If your hedge fund is looking to engage a
third-party marketer, please read some of our free advice on this niche area
of business at ThirdPartyMarketing.com, a free educational e-magazine on
the third-party marketing industry.
Question: We are looking for capital. Would a hedge fund invest in my
real estate venture or private company?
Answer : The hedge fund universe is diverse and there are hedge funds
that invest in real estate or in private companies, but these are few and
far between. You will need to obtain a specialized database of these typesof hedge fund managers, or screen carefully in one of the large hedge fund
database providers found online. For further information on databases, both
free and paid, please see InvestorDatabases.com, HedgeFund.Net, Hedge-
FundResearch.com, or FamilyOfﬁcesDatabase.com for more information.
Question: How long will it take us to raise capital after we launch our
fund?
Answer : The sales cycle is six to nine months long in retail channels
and 9 to 18 months long in institutional channels. This assumes that yourfund has a three- to ﬁve-year or longer track record and a high enough level
of AUM to approach each of these markets. Raising capital from investors
other than friends and family in your ﬁrst two years is very challenging.
The best route of action is to consider seed capital or approach high net
worth (HNW) accredited investors for potential investments. Even the most
experienced third-party marketers and capital raisers need 9 to 12 monthsto close on a signiﬁcant level of assets, and many need two to three years to
really work through their contact Rolodex and use all of their methods of
attracting capital to clients. It is important to know this up front when youstart a fund, both for budgeting and for setting reasonable expectations of
anyone you hire or bring on as a third-party marketer for the fund.
Question : Can you provide us some tips on how to develop relationships
with investors? Is there a process we could follow at a very high level?
Answer : Yes, there is. I was making my way through some marketing
training materials last year from Mr. Frank Kern and came across a market-
ing process which may seem somewhat like common sense, but it helps to
think about these things to ensure that you are presenting a complete mar-keting message to your potential fund investors. In the marketing training
program, Kern suggests you follow this four-step process while moving your
prospects through different phases of engaging your ﬁrm:
1.Interest and desire. Provide a white paper, speech, update on your per-
spective of the markets, which catches the attention of your potentialinvestor.144 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.Trust . Develop a relationship with the potential investor. Build trust
by providing client quotes, industry recommendations, and comparisonanalytics between your fund and others.
3.Proof . Show proof that your fund has a high pedigree team, detailed
consistent investment processes in place, and an advantage of some type
which can be tangibly displayed or conﬁrmed.
4.Sample . Allow the investor to start with a small minimum investment,
provide examples of what other investors like them have done in thepast, or present case studies on three different types of typical investors
that you serve so they can imagine being in that position.
The descriptions of these four steps are less important than the pro-
cess itself. If you can grab the attention of the investor, build a relationship
with them, provide proof of your abilities and performance, and then com-
bine that with a sample, you will be several steps ahead of much of yourcompetition.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the strategy of similar others, please type this URLinto your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Marketer
Question : How could we improve our PowerPoint pitch book for in-
vestors?
Answer : This will depend on its current state, your strategy, and your
target investors, but following are a few of the most common tips that I
often provide to fund managers looking to improve their PowerPoint pre-
sentations:
/squaresolidQuarterly update . Most potential investors will have already seen your
one-pager, which is updated monthly. The presentation should mention
your performance but the main purpose of it is to present your team’spedigree, investment process, and risk controls. Hire a professional edi-
tor to spend an hour reviewing the presentation after each major review;
this costs less than $100.
/squaresolidThree areas of focus . As previously indicated, the three areas of focus in
the PowerPoint presentation should be team pedigree and experience,
investment process, and risk controls. Many managers tend to be veryFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 145
high level while describing their investment process and risk controls,
frequently using terms that are seen too often in generic industry pre-sentations. You have to let out enough of your secret sauce in your
marketing materials so that others know there is actually something
there. Solid returns alone, even in these recent markets, are not enough.
You must provide some explanation of your consistent process, system,
and parameters for operating. Here is some advice on each of the three
most important sections of your PowerPoint presentation:
1.Team pedigree. Take the time to describe all of the relevant experi-
ence that your team holds, and try to explain those experiences in
ways that mesh well with your ﬁrm’s investment process and ap-proach to managing risk. Many types of experience can be valuable
to managing a portfolio of investments, but sometimes that connec-
tion needs to be spelled out in the presentation. If after creating this
section you realize that your team consists of just one or two pro-
fessionals without a long industry track record, consider beeﬁng upyour close advisory board with industry veterans and experts in risk
and portfolio management. Many times investors will ask how much
of a fund principal’s own assets are invested in the funds. Regardlessof the exact dollar amount, if 80 to 90 percent or more of your own
liquid assets are invested in this fund, check with your compliance of-
ﬁcer about noting this in your presentation materials. Many investors
turn to hedge funds due to an alignment of interests, and providing
evidence of this in your fund sometimes helps. It is important to re-
tain capital-raising talent as well, but without proper portfolio andrisk management professionals or advisory professionals in place,
you may just spin your wheels. As you expand your team, be sure
to include a team hierarchy tree in your presentation. This may in-clude your advisory team and a few service providers or research
groups with whom you work daily and upon whom you rely for
operations.
2.Investment process. This is most commonly the area of PowerPoint
presentations that needs improvement. I have found it easiest to tryto break your investment process into three to ﬁve steps, which could
then be broken down further during a due diligence phone call or in
meetings with potential investors. I would start with a single pagedisplaying the three- to ﬁve-step investment process your ﬁrm uses,
followed by one to two pages explaining each step of the process
in great detail. Describe the tools you use, the decision-making pro-cess, research inputs, parameters for reﬁning the universe of potential
investments, and triggers that may affect how the portfolio is con-
structed at each step. Following this, consider adding another page146 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
to the PowerPoint on buy and sell decision triggers: When do you
trim a position? When do you sell? When are positions cleared outcompletely? What stop-loss provisions are in place? Providing a few
trading case studies in this part of the PowerPoint may be helpful.
Use real-life examples from the previous quarter and update these
frequently so that analysts will be able to read into your decisions in
context of the recent market conditions.
3.Risk management techniques. Risk management techniques can be
placed in a separate section of the presentation or tacked onto the end
of your investment process section in the PowerPoint. It is hard to
go overboard on explaining with granularity what risk managementtechniques your ﬁrm employs. Start with the status quo: What tools,
research, stop-loss provisions, and systems are used? Next move on
to proprietary models you may be using, exclusive trading research,
or experience that provides additional insight into how you manage
risk in your portfolio.
/squaresolidMore is more. It is often better to go overboard with details on your
investment processes and risk management details than not to provide
enough information. That said, never let the presentation grow to over25 pages unless you have three or more products being presented in
a single presentation. Getting your PowerPoint right is about balanc-
ing transparency and granularity against confusion and informationoverload. Everyone is busy, and often getting someone to invest three
minutes to review your one-pager can be a challenge of its own.
Creating a solid PowerPoint presentation is a task of continual improve-
ment, but if you start with these tips it should set you above 50 percent of
the sub–$200 million hedge funds that we often speak with.
Question : What should we look at while interviewing a third-party
marketer we may hire?
Answer : Evaluating a potential marketer should be as rigorous as
completing a request for proposal (RFP) for an institutional consultant. Apartnership is being formed, and investing time and money with the wrong
professionals can be expensive in terms of both real dollars and opportu-
nity costs. Areas to cover while conducting due diligence on a third-partymarketer include:
/squaresolidPast work experience.
/squaresolidCurrent licensing and broker check.
/squaresolidAsset-raising history throughout their careers.
/squaresolidAsset-raising track record while working together in the ﬁrm.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 147
/squaresolidReferrals from past hedge fund clients.
/squaresolidNumber of years experience.
/squaresolidScope of their distribution channel expertise.
/squaresolidNumber of total current clients.
/squaresolidPotential commitment of time in terms of hours per week and duration
of the contract.
/squaresolidPersonality and culture of the third-party marketing group.
Question : What trends have you seen in terms of the types of investors
now out there in the hedge fund industry?
Answer : What I ﬁnd is that overall, while most marketers’ experiences
are very similar, each investor is different, just as the due diligence processesin different ﬁrms vary. Hedge fund investors typically fall into one of these
four categories:
1.The “Follow me” hedge fund investor. Most of these investors make up
your pool of family, friends, co-workers, and people you interact with
regularly. Usually, these people don’t understand how to perform the
necessary due diligence in making a decision to invest. This group alsotends to make assumptions. For example, if a manager holds a degree
from Harvard or has experience from a top ﬁnancial ﬁrm, this fact alone
would persuade these investors to follow suit, ignoring the probability
of fraud. In addition, they heavily rely on personal acquaintance and
recommendations from either you or someone you may know. If you
ask for a check, and they trust you, this group will most likely give oneto you.
2.The “Send me a prospectus” hedge fund investor. This group is a
bit more sophisticated and conducts a minimum amount of due dili-gence into the manager’s performance. Once they are satisﬁed with the
performance on paper, they will meet with and usually shower the man-
ager with questions regarding every aspect of the fund, including returns,
performance, strategies, and risks. What is written and spoken by the
manager is taken on faith and the information is not properly veriﬁedby the investor.
3.The investigating hedge fund investor. This type of investor is sometimes
considered a nuisance by busy professionals who might be caught off-guard by his questions. Not only will the investor keep the manager’s
number on speed dial, but he will perform due diligence above and
beyond the previous types and will go so far as to understand the entireoperation of the fund as if he were the manager. This type will also
interview members of the manager’s staff and will look into the balance148 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
sheet, cash controls, reporting, and other functions not directly related
to performance.
4.The independent hedge fund investor. The due diligence collected by
this investor is thoroughly reviewed independently. Investors in this cat-
egory know that independent opinions are extremely important. They
will contact the auditor, custodian, and administrator in addition to
the SEC and/or state securities agency. They won’t sign on the dot-
ted line until they are satisﬁed that they have independently veriﬁedeverything that matters, including assets under management, returns,
and even a year-end audit. They fully understand the risks that are
involved.
Nobody likes to be put in a box, but it is important to realize that
the types of investors can vary widely, so you should prepare an array of
marketing materials, from brief one-pagers to very detailed institutional-
quality PowerPoint presentations and third-party analyses for those most
scrutinizing parties. My experience has been that marketing materials that
are ﬁrst built to the highest standard and later summarized into smaller,dumbed-down pieces can be very effective and versatile.
Question : When marketing to ﬁnancial advisers for your hedge fund,
what steps do you need to take dealing with these guys? Is it any differentfrom dealing with family ofﬁces?
Answer : Marketing to ﬁnancial advisers is much different from market-
ing to single and multifamily ofﬁces. Here are the main differences between
the two:
/squaresolidFamily ofﬁces have more established due diligence procedures, often
involving consultants or internal analysts who do nothing but look athedge funds or alternative investment products.
/squaresolidFinancial advisers have lower minimum asset levels for what they willconsider investing. Ninety percent of family ofﬁces only seriously con-
sider investing in hedge funds with at least $75 to $100 million, and
many require $250 $300 million or even $1 billion in assets undermanagement.
/squaresolidFamily ofﬁces are more tight-lipped. It will take more effort to developa relationship, meet in person, and get clear feedback on why a hedgefund is or is not a good ﬁt for what they are looking for.
/squaresolidFamily ofﬁces are harder to identify in the ﬁrst place. Financial advisersare easier to ﬁnd, there are more of them, and they advertise moreopenly. Some family ofﬁces advertise but many stay below the radar,
and some purposely don’t even have a web site.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 149
/squaresolidWhile family ofﬁces service high net worth investors almost exclusively,
many ﬁnancial advisers work with a broad spectrum of client types.This might require more caution by them and by your fund in market-
ing products to them. It might also mean sorting through more ﬁnancial
advisers to ﬁnd one with several HNW clients.
/squaresolidIn my experience, ﬁnancial advisers seem much more sensitive to and
motivated by how they will earn a commission or income from the
transaction, whereas many family ofﬁces charge rich enough fees thatthis is less of an issue.
/squaresolidWhile some ﬁnancial advisers may take 16 to 24 months to really geton board with a relevant hedge fund manager, understand your invest-ment process, and possibly invest, most will come to terms a bit before
then. Family ofﬁces, by contrast, often take 18 to 24 months just to
complete their due diligence and committee meetings; it is a very long
sales process.
/squaresolidBoth family ofﬁces and ﬁnancial advisers require genuine relationship-
building efforts and tenacity.
From a legal standpoint there may be other precautions your fund should
take, but I am not a legal expert so I can’t provide any guidance in that
space.
Question : Richard, from a capital-raising perspective, what would you
say is the time frame to raise money (say $10 million or more) for a small,
start-up hedge fund with no name recognition and with principals who have
no name recognition and no pedigree in the alternative investment world?I would say 12 months at best. What do you think?
Answer : I would say 16 to 20 months would be realistic if they keep
their heads down and have a great team and a solid investment process.Those are big if’s, though—it is easy to get distracted or discouraged. The
ﬁrst fund I marketed took nine months straight of cold-calling, e-mails, and
conferences to raise a single dollar, but after 18 months we were raising
$1 million a week in new assets.
Question : Do you have a quick takeaway lesson that I could apply to my
business development work for our family of hedge funds? There is always
so much to get done and so little time to do it. What advice would you
give us?
Answer : Following is a quote I used recently while speaking with an
investment fund manager who was looking to raise capital. He was doing
so by approaching every investor he could possibly speak to. He was ex-
plaining how his ﬁrm has so few resources compared to their $1 billion
competitors.150 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
You can take a $5 disposable camera and take it out of the box,
stand 10 feet from a building, and take a great picture that will
be developed and look good if not great. You could stand in thatsame position with a $10,000 camera with every gadget, lens, and
a tripod, and it will not take as good a picture if you do not do one
thing: Focus.
—Brian Tracy
The point: You can beat your competition with a smaller staff, less ﬁ-
nancial resource, and less experience if you just learn to focus. Focus on
your top prospective investors, focus on local potential investors, and focusexclusively on the types of investors that are most likely to make allocations
to your fund. If you can dial in on these three areas—your hot prospect
list, local investors, and the right investor mix (family ofﬁces, wealth man-
agement, pension funds, etc.)—then you can really cover a lot of ground
quickly.
Question : For this question and answer exchange I actually went to
an outside expert, Richard Dukas from Dukas PR, who works with many
medium- and large-size hedge fund managers, and I asked him: Why shouldhedge funds invest in PR, especially when their ability to speak with the
press is restricted by law in many places?
Answer : Presently, most new hedge funds are launched with money
from friends and family, while more established players can launch new
funds from a pool of existing investors. Hedge funds are prohibited from
advertising and marketing. (Once contacted by a potential investor, a hedgefund can send out marketing material.) Thus, in order to attract new in-
vestors, hedge funds need to ﬁnd a way to get their name out there. One
way, of course, is through the media.
Most ﬁnancial journalists have contact with a hedge fund manager or
two. These managers are excellent sources of information, though much of
it is negatively directed toward companies. As such, much of the back-and-
forth between the media and hedge fund managers is off the record. The
SEC’s new rules, however, are aimed at transparency. With competition
among hedge funds ﬁerce, it certainly behooves hedge fund managers to use
their investment expertise to help the public, and drum up investors in the
process.
Most hedge fund managers are still extremely reticent when it comes to
speaking to the media. What I’ve found is that it’s very difﬁcult to solicit
managers to work with a PR ﬁrm.
Dukas says that the reticence comes from a feeling that hedge fund
managers should be secretive and not share their ideas with anyone but
their own investors. However, the new SEC regulations, combined with theFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 151
movement toward activist investing, may change that. Maybe [hedge fund
managers will realize] what they’re doing is not so secretive after all.
As an example of a hedge fund that has embraced the concept of working
with the media, look no further than our client Haven Advisors, which has
racked up considerable press over the past few years.
I mentioned that competition among hedge fund managers is ﬁerce, and
it’s not going to get easier. For example, Janus Capital, one of the world’s
largest mutual fund managers, recently launched a long/short mutual fundwith the goal of absolute return. In other words, Janus is offering investors
access to a mutual fund that acts in the same way that most hedge funds act,
but without the stiff management fees. More mutual funds such as the onelaunched by Janus should hit the market this year, opening up a whole new
pool of investors to the idea of hedge funds. The biggest reason, however, I
feel that hedge fund managers need PR people is the rise of activist investing.
Activist investing is not new, but for whatever reason, hedge funds
ratcheted up what we call “cage rattling” last year. The normal sequencegoes something like this:
1.A hedge fund builds up a large stake in a company by buying stock on
the open market because the fund feels the stock is undervalued.
2.The fund approaches management and the board of the company and
offers suggestions about how to unlock the value of the stock.
3.Management and the board ignore the fund, though in a noncombative
way.
4.The hedge fund gets tired of being jerked away, and publicizes its cage
rattling through an SEC ﬁling (usually attaching letters that it has sent
the company’s management and board).
In some cases, companies capitulate, mostly because other investors
have latched onto the ideas put forth by hedge funds and begun demand-
ing change. In other cases, companies will battle hedge funds, hoping to
eventually shake them out as investors. Regardless of the eventual outcome,
hedge funds need public relations people because companies inherently have
a public relations machine built into their organization. While hedge fundmanagers complain in SEC ﬁlings and on conference calls, companies are
utilizing their public relations resources to work the media and investors.
One good example of the company-versus-fund public relations mentality isTime Warner.
Last year, billionaire corporate raider Carl Icahn built a more than 3
percent stake in Time Warner. In doing so, Icahn began demanding a numberof changes, including a massive stock buyback and a better monetization
of Time Warner’s AOL asset. Time Warner gave in partly, announcing a
$12.5 billion stock repurchase. (Stock repurchases help companies boost152 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
earnings by giving existing shareholders more equity for their shares, that
is, existing shares become more valuable because there are fewer sharesoutstanding when the company buys back stock.) Time Warner, however,
didn’t do everything that Icahn asked.
When Time Warner announced a wide-ranging pact with Google, Icahn
was seemingly furious, warning the company ahead of the deal that it was
making a mistake. Time Warner, with its PR machine in full gear, basically
blew off Icahn, who was working the media in his own way. The end resultwas a deal that Time Warner wanted and was generally hailed for, and a
deal that Icahn apparently hates. At last check, Icahn was having difﬁculty
ﬁnding potential candidates for a reconstituted board that he wants to installat Time Warner. Negative PR toward Icahn, no doubt, has contributed to
this difﬁculty.
The main point to take home here is that there are public relations
strategies and campaigns which hedge fund managers can keep in mind and
follow. There are ethical and legal ways to promote or position a fund; itjust takes someone who has been there before to accomplish this.
Question: How are in-house hedge fund marketers typically compen-
sated?
Answer : There are half a dozen models for compensating in-house mar-
keters, but typically it is structured around a relatively low base salary
combined with a small percentage of fees from new assets raised and trails
from assets raised over the past two to ﬁve years. For example, a junior to
mid-level marketer may be paid a $52,000 base salary, receive 5 percent of
fees on new assets raised this year, and receive 3 percent of fees from assetsraised over the past ﬁve years. All of this may change drastically based on
the size of the hedge fund, the investor distribution channel targeted, the
track record of the fund, and the typical sales cycle and allocation sizes thatthe fund has recently experienced over the past two years. Some marketers,
if deeply experienced, ask for an equity partnership in the hedge fund to be
vested after two to four years, assuming they raise enough capital to push
them past a certain threshold set in the employment contract. This is most
likely the case with small- to medium-size hedge funds, which cannot affordto otherwise pay for this type of help.
Question : I have done a lot of cold-calling for the hedge fund I am
marketing. Do you have any cold-calling-related advice or tips, either for usas a team or for me individually?
Answer : Yes, I do have some tips, seven of which come immediately
to mind:
1.Don’t ask the prospect, “How are you doing?” You don’t care how
they are doing. If you cared you would have done some research on theFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 153
company ﬁrst and you would have something more intelligent to ask
them. This might sound harsh but it is true. Do your homework ﬁrst.
2.Keep in mind that thousands of people cold-call and several people are
probably calling the same or very similar prospects as the ones you
are approaching. Everyone plays the numbers game, and it is natural to
have your calls or e-mails go unanswered. The goal is to develop enough
perceived value so they will take your call the next time or call you when
they are ready to buy your product or service.
3.Shoot for 30 to 80 phone calls a day. More is not always better, but
trying to do 6 to 10 calls an hour will keep you on your toes and always
dialing more prospects. Create a game out of the process.
4.Smile while you dial. The tone of your voice and word choice both
change based on your own feelings and facial expressions. Be happy
and love your job, and the people on the other end of the phone will
take notice.
5.Call the CEO. Always call the CEO. They are the masters of every other
department and if a call or e-mail gets forwarded from them down to
a vice president or department manager, it is much more likely to get
responded to than coming in through an analyst or associate with theﬁrm.
6.Set the table. This is a point Brian Tracy makes in the book, Eat That
Frog (Berrett-Koehler, 2007). Sit down every night and take 20 minutes
to plan out your work for the next day. Break the day into 30-minute
sessions of complete focus, completing your most important tasks before
most people even get to work in the morning.
7.Prepare a standard e-mail that you send out before you call. Anyone
can send a great follow-up e-mail to a phone call—the trick is getting
the prospect on the phone in the ﬁrst place. Don’t have them refuseto take your call because they do not know who you are. E-mail the
prospect ﬁrst, introducing yourself and stating, in three to ﬁve sentences
or less, why you would like to have a ﬁve-minute conversation. Then
call 10 minutes after sending the e-mail out.
What is interesting about making all of these phone calls is listening to
how differently people sound and react during these conversations.
I remember one day last year I called someone who was unqualiﬁed.
It turned out that their company didn’t even provide the type of service I
was hoping to discuss. I made a joke about sending him a personal check or
Paypal payment to provide me with the type of contact I needed to connectwith, and it worked. I was not trying to be manipulative by forcing myself
to be funny to get information, I just made a dumb joke. Even after this was
obvious, this individual asked me what I needed and ended up connecting154 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
me with a very valuable contact. He also asked where I lived, where I grew
up, and if I had a wife or any kids. I was shocked, not while talking tohim but after I hung up. In eight months of making over 600 phone calls,
I had never once had someone be so friendly and up-front like that. It was
a refreshing change from the monotone burnt-out tone of voice I usually
end up listening to. What is important is not what happened during this
phone call but after I realized how valuable a contact he had given me. I felt
strongly obligated to thank him or repay him in some way.
This has taught me to always see the humor in situations and give value
away freely to those in need of help.
One last unrelated sales phone call lesson I have learned is that if you
have highly qualiﬁed the endperson that you are trying to reach, they will be
happy to talk to you because your service is relevant to them and necessary
for their success.
Question : What advice can you give me about networking with investors
and other hedge fund managers?
Answer : The best part about writing in HedgeFundBlogger.com each
day is getting the 200 to 300 e-mails a day from hedge fund professionals,
investors, and students in ﬁnance. One of the most frequent questions I getis “Can you help our hedge fund raise capital from new investors?” I usually
refer these people on to others, as the ﬁrm I am with already has our hands
full in raising capital right now for a set number of funds.
I recently read a quote, though, from Woody Allen: “Eighty percent of
success in life is simply showing up.” Show up at your local CHP and hedge
fund association meetings. Meet face-to-face with local ﬁnancial advisers,institutional consultants, and foundations. We are looking for something
more out of our jobs than a simple paycheck, and if your fund offers potential
investors something in the parameters of what they are allowed to choose,they might choose your product simply because of your relationship. My
favorite sales author, Jeffrey Gitomer, always says that “all things being
equal, people like to do business with their friends . . . and all things not
being equal, people still like to do business with their friends.” My quick
advice to most funds is to make sure your compliance details are in orderand then start showing up everywhere you can to start building long-term,
multiyear relationships in the industry. Maybe even join the Hedge Fund
Group for free and start networking there.
Question : Why is capital raising so difﬁcult?
Answer : Here’s one take:
/squaresolidForty-four percent of all salespeople quit trying after the ﬁrst call.
/squaresolidTwenty-four percent quit after the second call.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 155
/squaresolidFourteen percent quit after the third call.
/squaresolidTwelve percent quit trying to sell their prospect after the fourth call.
This means 94 percent of salespeople quit before the ﬁfth phone call,
while 60 percent of all sales are made after the fourth call. This means that
the overwhelming majority of hedge fund sales professionals don’t even give
themselves a shot at selling their products.
Question: Do you have any advice for creating a contract to work with
a third-party marketer? This is our ﬁrst time going through this process.
Answer : If you are hiring a third-party marketer for the ﬁrst time, move
slowly. Meet with your legal counsel before you even begin to speak with
third-party marketing ﬁrms so that you know what questions to ask up front.
If possible have a contract you would prefer to work under on hand so you
do not have to take their contract and modify it to your needs. Interview and
meet face-to-face with several third-party marketers who have references andtrack records of raising assets so you can start to pick out the smooth talkers
from those with real evidence of having successfully raised capital. Typically
it is a bad idea to pay front-heavy partnership fees or service initiation fees,but it is relatively common to pay some sort of ongoing monthly or quarterly
retainer to those ﬁrms that are spending time on marketing your fund every
day. If you would like to learn more about third-party marketing beforemoving forward, please see ThirdPartyMarketing.com for hundreds of free
related tips, articles, and resources.
Question: What is the difference between brokers, third-party mar-
keters, and capital introduction professionals?
Answer : All three types of professionals raise capital for hedge funds.
Brokers can sometimes be third-party marketers, but the term usually refersto more generic capital connectors or networkers in the industry who may
be accustomed to being paid small lump sums instead of a small percentage
of the management and performance fees over time. Third-party marketers
are independent capital raisers who use their Rolodex and reﬁned capital-
raising processes to raise the AUM levels of several fund managers at any
given time. Third-party marketers work with hedge funds, but they also
may represent mutual funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), private equity
groups, real estate investment trusts (REITs), and so on. Capital introductionteams are typically run inside of investment banks, trading houses, and prime
brokerage shops. These cap intro teams, as they are often called, raise capital
for their fund clients in an effort to keep them on their trading platform. Thelonger the fund remains trading in the platform, the more fees are generated
for the trading ﬁrm that supports them.156 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
HEDGE FUND CAREERS
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on how to start a hedge fund career, please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Career
Question : How important is ethics or ethical policies in the hedge fund
industry?
Answer : It’s important. In the hedge fund industry you have one name
and one reputation. If you ruin that, you could have inﬂuential people inthe industry refusing to do business with you for 15 to 20 years after their
initial opinion is formed. In such a competitive, close-to-the-vest industry
where large proﬁts can be made, the temptation to cut corners or look pastﬁduciary duties is sometimes too much.
The FBI recently had agents posing as a Florida-based hedge fund man-
ager to nab 10 individuals in ﬁve kickback schemes connected to securitiessales. The SEC charged 10 individuals and the U.S. Attorney’s ofﬁce charged
six with criminal offenses.
In each case, the posing hedge fund manager told the targets that their
actions must be kept secret because they violated his ﬁduciary duties, making
it explicitly known that what was going on was illegal and unethical. “This
case illustrates the Commission’s ability to work together with criminalauthorities in creative ways to uncover fraudulent schemes and to protect
our markets,” Linda Chatman Thomas, the head of the SEC’s enforcement
division, said.
Bottom line: If you are smart enough and hardworking enough to be
successful, then you don’t ever need to cut corners and blatantly breaksecurities laws. Innovation and relationships are the competitive advantages
that should make you extremely proﬁtable, not cheating the system.
Question: Is there a professional training or certiﬁcation program for
hedge fund professionals?
Answer : Yes, for professional training programs of many types please
visit HedgeFundTraining.com. This web site provides information onvarious hedge fund training programs available, including e-learning,
DVD/workbook training, and seminar-based training for hedge fund in-
dustry professionals. For the hedge fund industry certiﬁcation program,Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 157
the Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional (CHP) Designation, please visit
http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the credibility and global recognition of the
CHP Designation, please type this URL into your Web browser:
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Credibility
Question: How do I get started working in the hedge fund industry?
Answer : There are many steps to starting a hedge fund career. Here are
six of the ﬁrst ones you should take:
1.The ﬁrst thing you need to do to start a career in the industry is to read
as much as you can about what is going on, how hedge funds operate,and where you may ﬁt in. You will waste your own time and others’
if you do not complete this ﬁrst step. To learn as much as possible in
a single month, read four to ﬁve books, subscribe to four or ﬁve freenewsletters on hedge funds, and register for daily Google Alerts as well.
Make sure to read at least two books on hedge fund careers and at least
two books on hedge funds as an industry.
2.Finding an area in the industry that is a realistic entry point, includes
potential work you are passionate about, and draws upon your past
work experience and strengths. Gaining employment is a competitiveprocess in this industry, and you will typically need to show evidence of
commitment and loyalty to get in.
3.Identify two to three hedge fund industry career mentors. Identify a
professor, hedge fund professional, or retired investment industry pro-
fessional who could help provide you with advice and guidance on ev-erything from crafting your resume to interviewing for open positions.
4.Complete one or more internships in the industry. It does not matter
where you are located; there are hedge funds on every continent lookingfor help in completing their trading, potential investor, or competitive
industry research. If you put yourself out there and do not give up, you
will get into the industry and gain internships. At the beginning you mayhave to work for free to gain initial experience.
5.Develop a unique value proposition to potential employers. Reﬂect on
your recently gained knowledge, natural abilities, past work experience,158 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
and education. Decide how you could effectively present that as a great
package to the hedge funds or service providers to whom you are apply-ing for jobs. Do not be generic; come up with speciﬁc skills and abilities
that allow you to stand out.
6.Some skills that stand out to hedge fund managers include quantitative
modeling experience, Ivy League or advanced education, signs of loyalty
or passion, retention of designations such as the CHP Designation, high-
quality names from respected or local hedge funds on your resume, anda stomach for a high commission/proﬁt-sharing type position.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund internships, please type this URL intoyour Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Internships
Question: What are the top mistakes often made by hedge fund career
professionals?
Answer : There are ﬁve mistakes that our team sees hedge fund pro-
fessionals and students making while trying to obtain employment in the
industry. Our team receives over 50,000 career-related e-mails a year, and
these mistakes are what we see most commonly made from this perspective
of the industry:
1.Annoying . Every week we speak with professionals who are very pas-
sionate about working in the hedge fund industry. They will do almost
anything to get a job working for a hedge fund, and they are eager to
show this while networking and during interviews. The problem is that
it can come off as overbearing and desperate. The more successful a
hedge fund or any company is, the busier they typically will be, and
the better the employer they will probably be as well. This means that
the best employers have the least patience for those potential job candi-
dates who send in three to four e-mails a week or leave two voice mailsin a single day regarding open jobs or whether their resume has been
reviewed.
2.Overconﬁdent . One ironic aspect about growing a career or gaining
knowledge on any niche subject is that the more you know, the more
you realize you don’t know very much. In other words, with each new
skills or lesson that you pick up, you are opened to a dozen new skillsFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 159
or lessons that you now realize you will have to master. Experienced
business professionals and hedge fund managers know this, so comingoff as all-knowing, or a master at anything, can often be taken as a sign
of ignorance or a low tolerance for any teaching or instruction that may
be required to complete the job well.
3.Long resumes and e-mails. This goes hand-in-hand with point 1 on not
being annoying, but it so important that I am pulling it out as a separate
point by itself. Many times when you think there are seven or eightimportant reasons why someone should interview or hire you, you may
want to explain all of these in a single two- to three-page e-mail. This
is a huge mistake; these e-mails are instantly deleted. Nobody in theindustry has time to ready 20 essays by potential candidates on why
they should be hired. Keep your e-mails down to three to ﬁve sentences
at most, and be as concise and clear as possible.
4.Generic . Do whatever you can so that you are not generic. Nobody
wants to hire someone who is just okay at many different things. Youmust stand out as being especially detail-oriented, teachable, passionate,
or intelligent. Deﬁne your skill set and unique skills before the interview
so you can ensure that the potential employer remembers them after theinterview.
5.Nothing but passion . We see many professionals trying to enter the
industry with nothing but a business degree and a lot of passion and
desire. That is not enough, and you will fail if that is all you have. You
must work your way into small internships and research projects. You
must always be reading more about hedge funds and the specializedknowledge the job you are aiming for requires.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on top ﬁve hedge fund career mis-
takes, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Mistakes
Question : Do you have a system for career development or improvement
that you could share with us who are within our ﬁrst ﬁve to seven years ofour career?
Answer : Yes. There is a formula that I have used over the past seven
years to help me build my resume, career, and now my own small business,160 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
and that is the SKAR formula. This is not a way to shortcut the hard work
it takes to be successful, but rather a map of where you should invest yourenergy to increase the results you get in return.
SKAR Development Formula
Specialized Knowledge +Authority +Results
=Huge growth opportunities and faster development
within your career or business
SKAR Deﬁnitions
/squaresolidSpecialized knowledge means speciﬁc knowledge that is practical, func-
tional, and very niche-speciﬁc to the area within which you work or the
skill or ability you rely on to perform well. Specialized knowledge existswhether you are an airplane pilot, hedge fund analyst, or third-party
marketer. The difference between having specialized knowledge and
not having it could mean the difference between spending 18 months
to complete a task or project and being able to develop strong client
relationships and complete the same task in just three months. Having
specialized knowledge lets you identify more opportunities, move morequickly on them, and execute with efﬁciency. When multiplied over sev-
eral years, this puts you in a different league of competition. Some ideas
on how you can further develop your specialized knowledge include:
/squaresolidRead two books/month for the next two years on the area of spe-
cialized knowledge that is going to beneﬁt your business or career
most.
/squaresolidSubscribe to three of the best newsletters from blogs or experts in your
industry which are notrehashed press releases and garbage news. You
learn close to nothing from reading the news. Instead, read insights,
analyses, and white papers within these newsletters. There are at least
two to three valuable free newsletters in each industry.
/squaresolidComplete a niche training and certiﬁcation program speciﬁc to your
area of specialized knowledge. Having a third party verify that you
have obtained a certain level of specialized knowledge is always going
to be more credible than your own statement that “I like to read books
and e-mail newsletters, here is what I have read lately.” Seek out an
online certiﬁcation program and start one within six months. Thiswill force you to read and learn more within your niche.
/squaresolidWrite one article a week on your thoughts, best practices, and lessonslearned within your niche area of practice. Write anonymously byFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 161
creating a free blog at Blogger.com and start synthesizing what you
are learning and combining other ideas to create your own originalconcepts (such as this blog post).
/squaresolidAuthority means creating structures around your ﬁrm or self so that
your knowledge and abilities are communicated in a way that posi-tions you as an authority in your niche area. Ideally, this area lines
up one-to-one with your area of specialized knowledge, and it can be
the result of gathering this knowledge. Two professionals can hold thesame knowledge, yet while one write ﬁve books and completes over
50 press interviews a year, the other may be an armchair critic with
a small group of ﬁve to seven consulting clients. The better-positionedprofessional will reap rewards from new opportunities coming toward
him, instead of the other way around.
I was a competitive swimmer earlier in my life, and the best book
I read on swimming was called Total Immersion by Terry Laughlin ,
and within the book he uses the phrase “swimming downhill.” It wasa way to swim so that your body is tilted forward and you literally cut
continually downward into the water. If you get authority positioning
right, it will be like you are swimming downhill. Jeffrey Gitomer is agreat study of authority positioning. He started writing eight pages a
day when he was 46 years old; now in his ﬁfties he has more than 10
best-selling books, and charges more than Colin Powell for speeches.The real important detail, though, is he never cold-calls anyone and
never scrambles for new business. His phone literally rings off the hook
with new opportunities, clients, and joint venture partnerships due tohis positioning. He is swimming down a steep hill.
/squaresolidPublish your own newsletter or blog. Even if you only publish some-thing once every two weeks, having it and building it over time iswhat is important.
/squaresolidInterview one professional each month for your own blog or newslet-ter, explaining that you can’t compensate them but as your web site
becomes more popular they may get some exposure, plus they can
have a copy of the recorded phone call transcript, MP3 ﬁle, or docu-ment that you type up. Interviewing experts is a shortcut to gaining
specialized knowledge and authority positioning quickly. Being able
to tell others that you have interviewed 20 of the top experts in the in-dustry and that overall you found A and B and, most surprisingly, C,
is very powerful and carries authority. Note: The more strongly you
have fulﬁlled your work in building specialized knowledge, the morewilling these experts will be to connect with you and the more pointed
and reﬁned your questions will be. Ever done an interview with a
journalist who has never worked in your ﬁeld? Not always fun or162 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
fulﬁlling to answer the basics, which can be looked up on Google in
three seconds.
/squaresolidTake what you have written within your own newsletter or blog and
self-publish a book with 60 to 80 pages of single-spaced text. Anyone
can do this for $15 at Lulu.com. Very simple—no more excuses thatyou do not have a book deal. I got my second big investment mar-
keting contract partially because I had a self-published book in hand
and someone gave me a chance based on my dedication to the niche.
The book positions you as an authority.
/squaresolidCreate a one-page PDF list of all of your past clients. This can showdepth, experience, and respect that others have given you by payingfor your services and time in the past.
/squaresolidSpeak at conferences. It is relatively easy to land speaking spots atconferences, networking events, and seminars. Lots of professionals
are looking for others with unique ideas and lessons to share. And
again, teaching what specialized knowledge you have gained helps youconnect and synthesize these ideas. If you are speaking to a crowd, you
are in an authority position, and when you mention your speaking it
adds credibility because others have stopped their business days andinvested their valuable time to listen to what you have to say.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on authority construction tips, please type this URLinto your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Authority
/squaresolidResults . The importance of showing real, tangible results cannot be over-
stated. Finding ways to do this within service businesses, the fund man-
agement industry, or within certain areas of extreme conﬁdentiality is
challenging. Some types of tangible results that can be shared include:
/squaresolidAn actual printed-out version of part of the service or end result of
the product or service.
/squaresolidVideo (preferred) or text (not as good) testimonials from past and
current clients, the more speciﬁc to the immediate need or concern of
your potential client or employer, the better—and the more numerous
the testimonials, the better.
/squaresolidThe ﬁrst 15 to 20 percent of the product or your service given away
for free on a trial basis. For example, offer a ﬁrst month trial for $1,
four weeks of free work or time so you can prove your worth to theclient, and so on.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 163
/squaresolidDiverse and numerous case studies of past clients or employers. This
proves that you work with ﬁrms with various needs and have foundsolutions for them, and it allows the reader of these case studies to
imagine you solving their problem.
/squaresolidA little tip, quick takeaway, or lesson within your sales letter or web
site which provides the potential client with immediate beneﬁt. This
proves that you have the goods, are an authority, and do have their
best interests in mind.
Another related topic that I don’t have space to go into here is that
underlying all three of these SKAR items is having the right habits. Habitshave been shown to form 96 percent of what we do every single day. We tend
to eat the same things, walk the same way, watch the same shows, and read
the same types of books. As the quote goes, “First you form your habits, andthen your habits form you.” What business habits are you forming? What
elements of the SKAR formula are you using each week? When you read
this type of advice, are you thinking, “I already know this stuff,” or “Howgood am I at that, and where could I improve?”
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the SKAR formula, please type this URL into yourWeb browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/SKAR
Question: Could you recommend three books on hedge fund careers?
Answer : Yes, to start with you could download a free e-book we offer
on hedge funds online at http://HedgeFundsCareer.com. After that I would
recommend reading Hedge Me by Claude Schwab (Lynx Media, 2006) and
then All About Hedge Funds by Robert Jaeger (McGraw-Hill, 2002). These
books combined will provide you with a good historic background of the
industry, different perspectives on trends affecting hedge fund employment,
and some tips on networking and connecting with hedge fund managers.
Question : I have been trying to get into the hedge fund industry for over
four months now with no real progress. I’m about to give up and I just don’t
know whether there is any hope for someone like me with no Ivy Leagueeducation or experience yet in the industry.
Answer : I made it into the industry and did well with neither of those
resources under my belt. You probably can, too, if you want it badly enough.
Here are some tips for building and keeping a positive attitude for when you164 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
are trying to overcome a challenge such as breaking into the hedge fund
industry. This is what I do for my own goals and business:
/squaresolidI work out at least three times a week.
/squaresolidI have several three- to four-minute motivational podcasts or audio
book clips on my iPod that I can listen to on the way to work.
/squaresolidI read 15 pages of attitude-changing articles or books every morning
while I am eating breakfast (see Jeffrey Gitomer’s Little Gold Book of
YES! Attitude [FT Press, 2006].).
/squaresolidI have created a one-page laminated sheet with the top 50 business and
sales lessons I have learned, and I have posted it in my shower, on my
bathroom mirror, and behind my desk at work. I do my best to readthis list twice a day to remind myself of what is important.
/squaresolidI set BHAGS for myself—big, hairy, audacious goals, as described by Jim
Collins in Good to Great (HarperBusiness, 2001). My current BHAGS?
I want to become theexpert in investment marketing and sales, run 50
investment web sites that rank in the top three slots of Google search
results, and become a best-selling author.
/squaresolidI try to ﬁnd a lesson to be learned from each negative experience. If
nothing else, a negative experience should always tell you something
about yourself.
/squaresolidI am always learning and exploring something new. First, it was get-
ting into Harvard and moving to Boston; now it is learning all I can
about investment marketing and sales, the psychology of inﬂuence, and
Web marketing. As soon as you stop being curious and challenged you
become stale and unmotivated.
/squaresolidI cut off or drastically reduce communication with negative people.
/squaresolidI don’t watch the local news. It is worthless. How often do you see a
news story about a generous church donation, a child winning a scienceproject award, or an organ donor saving someone’s life? Not nearly as
often as a plane crash, ﬁre, or robbery. If you have to get the local news,
read it online for ﬁve minutes and save yourself some time.
Question : What would be your advice regarding third-party marketing?
Is this trend dying out or growing? I am trying to learn more about the
space.
Answer : If you are starting a third-party marketing career you are in
good company: Dozens of highly experienced investment and hedge fund
marketing/sales professionals are entering the industry each year. In termsof total ﬁrms offering services, the industry is growing by over 15 percent
each year. While some professionals may leave an investment manager or
hedge fund to start their own third-party marketing ﬁrm, many more ﬁrstFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 165
work or partner with an existing third-party marketing ﬁrm. The beneﬁts of
starting or working for a third-party marketing ﬁrm are many, and doing ei-ther is relatively easy to do. If you can raise capital and consistently bring in
$100 million to $200 million/year, you can typically eliminate most types of
political and corporate risks while having the potential of earning two to four
times more than you would with the same experience while working for a
large institution such as Morgan Stanley or Goldman Sachs. As the economy
goes through this rough patch and bonuses are skimmed and 50-year old ex-ecutives laid off, I see this trend of third-party marketing start-ups and career
moves increasing. To learn more, please see http://thirdpartymarketing.com.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund marketing careers, please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Careers
Question: I am a 38-year-old insurance executive and I have always
wanted to work in the hedge fund industry. Do you believe it is too late tomake a career change?
Answer: We get at least one question like this each month from profes-
sionals who work in investment banking, insurance, or corporate ﬁnance.The answer is no, it is not too late. It is an advantage if you have some corpo-
rate best practices training and some skill set that will help a fund manager
grow their business. Oftentimes hedge fund managers need accountants, ﬁ-nancial modelers, capital raisers, project managers, ﬁnancial analysts, and
detail-oriented investment professionals to help move their business forward.
If you can’t get an interview or position with a large hedge fund, make sure
to try meeting with local service providers and small hedge funds start-ups
or emerging hedge funds. A face-to-face meeting is worth 10 phone callswhen it comes to networking.
Question: I am about to enroll in the CHP Designation Program. What
does the program include? What is the process that I will go through?
Answer: The CHP Designation is an online self-study training and cer-
tiﬁcation course on hedge funds. Once you join the program you will be
sent a welcome letter thanking you for registering and providing you withbullet-point steps on how you can attend our networking events, gain ac-
cess to our educational video content (over 100 videos and tools), receive
our career coaching, acquire the required readings, access the mock exam,166 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
schedule your exam, and take advantage of CHP membership beneﬁts. You
then study using the video content, CHP study guide, and required read-ings, using our team as support when you have questions or get stuck
on certain speciﬁc subjects. Your exam is conducted 100 percent online
from wherever you are based. Over 40 percent of our participants com-
plete the CHP Designation from outside of the United States. Learn more at
http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
Question: What are your top tips for those who would like to start a
career in the hedge fund industry? Anything else unique to what you have
already mentioned?
Answer: Yes, here are some additional tips:
/squaresolidBe absolutely sure you actually want to work in the hedge fund industry.
As Yoda said, do or do not, there is no “try.” If you try you will fail,
because this industry is very competitive and it takes dedication and
hard work to do well in the hedge fund industry.
/squaresolidBecome a student of the hedge fund industry. Study the industry every
day by reading magazines, e-mail newsletters, books, and white papers.
You need to speak the language of the industry.
/squaresolidUse the three-circles strategy from Jim Collins. Collins suggests to move
forward only with decisions that are a good ﬁt with your background,
involve something you are passionate about, and have the potential of
being highly proﬁtable. I use this strategy in my own life and you should,too, as you look at opportunities in this ﬁeld.
Question : I am attending your Hedge Fund Premium seminar network-
ing event next month in New York. I have never been to a networking eventbefore and I wanted to see if you had a few quick tips on networking for
me. Anything you can share?
Answer : If you’re looking to enter the hedge fund industry either work-
ing directly for a ﬁrm or as a service provider to one, networking events and
conferences are a great way to get your foot in the door.
Many professionals fail to take advantage of these opportunities, even
those who attend. Here are ﬁve tips that should prepare you for attending a
networking event or conference:
1.Don’t be shy . Attending a hedge fund event is a good start, but you do
not gain anything if you do not talk to other attendees, speakers, and
sponsors. The event is only valuable if you make it valuable, so networkand socialize with those around you.
2.Don’t scare people off . Another mistake is to be too forward when
approaching managers or service providers, especially if you are lookingFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 167
to land a job in the hedge fund industry. Instead of sharing insights and
thoughts on the industry, many young professionals will focus entirelyon their own needs (a job) and ignore those managers or executives
who are not currently hiring. This is the wrong mentality. Assuming
you have been following the industry and paid good attention to the
speaker, you will have a good starting point for initiating a conversation.
Ask questions when appropriate and listen when the other person is
speaking. If you are looking for a job, don’t start a conversation byvoicing that problem. Those who work in the industry are not paying
to hear someone complain about not working in private equity. But you
should mention it when the timing is appropriate.
3.Get your name out there . If you cannot ﬁnd a hiring ﬁrm or no ﬁrms
are interested in your product or service, don’t despair—get your name
out there. It may just be an inconvenient moment or the person you are
talking with is not the right person at the ﬁrm. For example, if you are
marketing your auditing service to a principal in charge of evaluatingdeals, he may not be interested. Give him your business card regardless;
in another quarter the ﬁrm may be looking for a new auditor and still
have your card. Even if you do not directly land a client through thismethod, it boosts your ﬁrm’s or your own name recognition. If you’re
looking for a job (from analyst to executive), give your card out. Then
when the ﬁrm is eventually hiring they will probably have your name
on ﬁle.
4.Prepare an elevator pitch. It may not sound great, but you are a product
that needs to be sold. Therefore you need to have a great elevatorpitch that comes out effortlessly. Whether you are looking to network,
marketing to investors, or job seeking, a solid elevator pitch is necessary.
Be concise and include only essential information.
5.Look and act like a professional. Even though you are not at work
when you’re attending an event or conference, act like you are. You are
meeting potential clients and partners, so you essentially are working.
Wear a suit. If it’s hot, as many crowded events are, at least make the
initial effort and take off your coat once you sit down. Look your best(haircut, shave, and a suit) or no one will take you seriously. It’s better to
be overdressed than underdressed. Remember your manners, especially
if it is a catered event, and use language that you would be comfortableusing in the ofﬁce.
Question : I am looking to work in the third-party marketing space. Do
you have any career advice or book recommendations for those who want
to work in third-party marketing? Do you have advice for getting a job in
this niche industry?168 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Answer : There are no great books on third-party marketing that I am
aware of. Everyone is pretty close-to-the-vest in the industry. I haven’t founda great book on investment sales, either, but I know there are a few of those
if you look around on Amazon. If you are looking for great books just on
sales, I really like Jeffrey Gitomer’s three books: The Sales Bible (HarperBusi-
ness, 2008), Little Red Book of Sales Answers (FT Press, 2006), and Little
Gold Book of Yes! Attitude (FT Press, 2006). Those books have changed
my career.
Hedge fund marketing and sales fee structures vary depending on the
type, reputation, and abilities of the third-party marketing (3PM) ﬁrm. Some
retain only two to three clients at a time and charge retainers for this focus oftheir attention, while others might work with 10 money managers (clients) at
once and only get paid on commission. Usually commissions are 20 percent
of both the base fee and performance fee when working with hedge funds.
If you work for a hedge fund, you will be restricted to their strategies,
so if their performance dips or the strategy goes out of favor you might notraise any money and it wouldn’t be your fault. If you work for a 3PM ﬁrm,
you would probably get to market two to three different money managers
in some capacity across diverse distribution channels such as endowmentsand foundations, broker-dealers, and directly to high net worth individuals.
If a strategy goes out of favor, you just ﬁnd a new money manager to
market as a ﬁrm, and you avoid the downside of being a hedge fund sales
professional. Common compensation for internal hedge fund salespeople is
$80,000 to $200,000 with some making $400,000 to $800,000 per year
and maybe three to 10 commissions that might trail off over time. Commoncompensation for a 3PM, as I mentioned earlier, is a retainer of $60,000 to
$150,000 (if they get one) plus 20 percent of fees.
I’m not even 40 years old yet, and I went the third-party marketing
route because I want to be able to have knowledge of the DNA and powerful
relationships in every major distribution channel, and I want to ﬁgure out
where the real money and momentum are and be able to shift my focus to
that point. I believe it is harder to get a 3PM job because most want you to
have a book of business or solid relationships, but it can be done. In my ﬁrstthird-party marketing position I worked for free for three weeks to prove
myself, and I took a big cut in pay coming in the door, but it was worth it
to learn so much in so little time. Invest in yourself for the long term, nevertake ethical shortcuts in this industry, and you will do well.APPENDIX A
Bonuses of $1,779
The following is a list of book bonuses that we have negotiated or set
up on behalf of readers of this book. By purchasing this book you have
supported our organization, so in return we would like to provide you withthese bonuses.
CHP Designation Tuition Discount: To thank those who have pur-
chased this book, the Hedge Fund Group can offer $100 off regis-tration for the CHP Designation Program when you register for theCHP Level 1 and Level 2 Combination Package on our web site.
Registration for the program opens just twice a year, on January
15 and July 15. Learn more at http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
Value of discount: $100.
InvestorDatabases.com: Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of your receipt
for purchasing this book and receive 30 percent off your ﬁrst pur-chase made at InvestorDatabases.com. Investor Databases provides
over a dozen databases that include complete contact details for
funds of hedge funds, family ofﬁces, wealth management ﬁrms,
endowment funds, institutional consultants, and more. Value of
discount: $800+.
HedgeFundPremium.com : Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of your
receipt for purchasing this book and receive three months’ freeaccess to HedgeFundPremium.com and a lifetime membership
rate of just $12/month instead of the public price of $27/month.
HedgeFundPremium.com is an exclusive membership program
for hedge fund professionals. Members gain access to exclusive
video content, workbooks, job connector tools, and capital-raising
resources. Value of discount: $200+ (ﬁrst-year value).
Hedge Fund Marketing Mechanics: Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of
your receipt for purchasing this book and receive 40 percent off
169The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 170 APPENDIX A: BONUSES OF $1,779
this package, which provides best practices, overlooked opportu-
nities, strategies, and unique techniques to raise more capital foryour hedge fund. Learn more at HedgeFundMarketingMechanics
.com. Value of discount : $250+(ﬁrst-year value).
HedgeFundTraining.com : Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of your receipt
for purchasing this book and receive $50 off any hedge fund au-
dio program, training session, webinar, seminar, or DVD package.
Value of discount : $100.
HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com : Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of
your receipt for purchasing this book and receive 30 percent off
your ﬁrst purchase made at HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com. The
Hedge Fund Investor Directory was constructed by the Hedge Fund
Group, the largest networking association in the hedge fund in-dustry. The Hedge Fund Investor Directory provides contact de-
tails for more than 2,000 unique institutions that typically invest
in hedge fund managers. Explore the packages we offer at http://HedgeFundInvestorDirectory/Buy.html. Value of discount : $329.APPENDIX B
Example Due Diligence Questions
QUESTIONNAIRE
Investment Adviser
Request for Information
A.Corporate Background
1.Name and address of ﬁrm.
2.Principal contact.
3.When was your ﬁrm founded?
4.Is your ﬁrm a registered investment adviser? A commodity trading
adviser? A commodity pool operator?
5.Is your ﬁrm afﬁliated with a broker-dealer?
6.What is the organizational structure of your ﬁrm?
7.Have there been any material organizational changes in the past ﬁveyears?
8.What is the current number of employees at your ﬁrm? Please pro-
vide a breakdown by category.
a.Portfolio managers:
b.Research analysts:
c.Client services:
d.Administration:
e.Other:
9.Please provide a breakdown of your ﬁrm’s assets under management
for the following time periods:
Year Assets # Accounts
1992
1993
19941995
1996
1997
171The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 172 APPENDIX B: EXAMPLE DUE DILIGENCE QUESTIONS
1998
1999
2000
20012002
2003
20042005
2006
20072008
2009
2010
10. Please list the number of accounts/assets gained/lost during the fol-
lowing periods:
Year Accounts
Gained Assets
Gained AccountsLost Assets
Lost
19981999
2000
20012002
2003
20042005
2006
20072008
2009
2010
11. Please list all states in which your ﬁrm is currently registered to
conduct advisory business.
12. What backup technology measures are in place to ensure the in-
tegrity of account access and information? What are your disaster
retrieval procedures?a.Security:
b.Disaster recovery:Appendix B: Example Due Diligence Questions 173
B.Legal and Compliance
1.Please detail your ﬁrm’s ﬁdelity bonding and errors and omissions
(E&O) and directors and ofﬁcers (D&O) coverage (underwriter,
limitations, deﬁnitions, and claims history).
2.Please describe all litigation, arbitration, and self-regulatory orga-
nization (SRO)/regulatory violations involving the ﬁrm, principals,
portfolio managers, traders, and any professional support staff inthe past 10 years.
3.Please list all NASD broker-dealers with whom your ﬁrm works.
4.Who has custody of your accounts? Please detail.
5.What is the procedure for reviewing new accounts?
6.Describe the ﬂow of client funds from the initial deposit with your
ﬁrm to the placement at the custodian.
7.Are regular internal audits performed? If yes, please detail the
frequency and process.
8.Please outline management control procedures.
C.Investment Methodology
1.Please describe your ﬁrm’s investment methodology for asset
allocation and/or market timing that is utilized by your program.
2.What technical and/or fundamental indicators does the program
utilize? Please provide a description of the portfolio models and
indicators tracked.
3.Please list the asset classes in your investment models.
4.Are guidelines in place to prevent undue concentrations? If so, please
detail.
5.Describe the process of selecting an investment for use in a model.
Does an investment committee review these investments? If yes, who
makes up the committee?
6.How are client risk tolerance and objectives incorporated into the
investment decision-making process?
7.How often is client information updated to ensure that the risk
tolerance and objectives are still applicable?
8.How are buy/sell decisions made?
9.What factors determine whether an investment is rated aggressive,
conservative, and so on?
10. What resources are devoted to internal research? Are external
sources used?
11. What professional standards are required of the research staff (i.e.,
experience, CFA, MBA, etc.)?
12. Describe the frequency and process for adjusting the asset allocation
mix. How are these adjustments implemented?174 APPENDIX B: EXAMPLE DUE DILIGENCE QUESTIONS
13. Does your ﬁrm automatically rebalance portfolios? If so, on what
basis?
14. What are the criteria for reallocation and rebalancing a port-
folio?
15. Do clients have the option to purchase securities that are not part
of the investment model? If so, is this portion of the portfolio
segregated?
16. For market timers/asset allocators: How many switches are there in
an average year?
17. For private portfolio managers: What is the turnover rate of
portfolios? Average number of holdings?
18. What percentage of the time do you anticipate being invested in the
markets for each investment discipline managed by your ﬁrm?
19. Please detail all changes in investment philosophy since inception.
20. What professional standards are required of your portfolio man-
agers to manage client funds (i.e., experience, CFA, MBA, etc.)?
D.Fee Structure
1.Please describe in detail your fee structure and sharing arrange-
ments, including billing process. Describe your policy concerning
working with broker-dealers, as well as your policy relative to
representatives or solicitors terminating their relationship with thebroker-dealer.
2.Are the fees charged comparable to those charged by similar ser-
vices?
3.What is the refund policy should a client opt not to continue to
employ your services?
4.Please detail all client costs, including transaction fees and custody
expenses.
5.Are load funds incorporated in the models, and if so, are the
commissions offset?
6.Are direct participation plans utilized in any of these models? If so,
how is the market value of these securities valued for purposes ofbilling?
E.Performance Record
1.Please provide a detailed explanation related to the basis of
presentation relative to your performance record. Please ensure
that this information addresses the following topics: gross or net ofmanagement fees, and actual accounts versus hypothetical. If actual
accounts are used, please explain the reason for their inclusion in
the composite.Appendix B: Example Due Diligence Questions 175
2.Is this performance record the result of any linkage with a prior
ﬁrm or entity? If yes, provide the date when the current ﬁrm’sperformance begins and any differences between the investment
methodologies.
3.Has an independent third party veriﬁed your track record? If yes,
who?
4.Are the personnel responsible for your performance record still with
your ﬁrm? If not, how has this affected your ﬁrm?
5.Please provide a quarter-by-quarter performance composite (gross
and net of advisory fees) for at least 10 years (if available) for
your portfolio. Is this composite AIMR compliant? What level ofAIMR compliance (Level I or Level II)? Please provide your AIMR
disclosure language along with the composite return information.
F.Client Notiﬁcation
1.Do your statements satisfy ERISA guidelines?
2.Which indexes, if any, are included with the statements?
3.With what frequency are the statements generated?
4.Does your ﬁrm provide tax reporting beyond the 1099 reporting
provided by the custodian?APPENDIX C
Top Hedge Fund Web Sites
Following is a list of top hedge fund and alternative investment web sites
run by our team and others that was ﬁrst published by HedgeFundBlogger
.com.
HedgeFundBlogger.com: The number one most popular web site on
the topic of hedge funds with over 5,000 free-to-access videos, arti-
cles, resources, guides, interviews, and e-books. You may ﬁnd many
resources here that you would have to pay a subscription for else-where. (http://HedgeFundBlogger.com)
Albourne Village : Great job board, news feeds, community announce-
ments, and educational white papers as well. This is one of the
oldest and most well-rounded web sites in the hedge fund industry.
(http://Village.Albourne.com)
HedgeFundsCareer.com : Detailed advice, interviews, Q&A, and train-
ing information related to starting and growing a career in the hedge
fund industry. (http://HedgeFundsCareer.com)
FINalternatives : Great well-rounded news web site on alternative invest-
ments in general. This web site is not exclusively focused on hedge
funds, but it does discuss them daily in its original news reports.
(www.ﬁnalternatives.com)
Hedge Fund Blogspot by Veryan Allen: In-depth analytical takes on re-
cent hedge fund industry trends and challenges. Veryan provides aunique view of the industry as a risk portfolio management consul-
tant. (http://hedgefund.blogspot.com)
SEC Guide to Hedge Funds: A must-read web site for anyone who is
starting to complete research on hedge funds as potential invest-
ments. (www.sec.gov/answers/hedge.htm)
ThirdPartyMarketing.com: The only free-to-access educational web
site on capital raising, fund marketing, and third-party marketing
177The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 178 APPENDIX C: TOP HEDGE FUND WEB SITES
that provides consulting advice to both marketers and fund man-
agers. The web site hosts over 250 resources, articles, and videos.(http://ThirdPartyMarketing.com)
New York Times DealBook: Hedge Funds : This blog is hosted by the
New York Times and covers developing hedge fund stories each day.
Great place to get some insight and opinion on top of the regular
news. (http://dealbook.blogs.nytimes.com/category/hedge-funds/)
Hedge Fund Startup Guru.com : Articles and videos for emerging hedge
fund managers, new hedge fund start-ups, and traders who are
considering launching a new fund. (http://HedgeFundStartupGuru.
com)
Investopedia on Hedge Funds : This web site provides over a dozen ed-
ucational articles of more than 800 words each on hedge funds.It reads like a short magazine on long-term hedge fund indus-
try facts, statistics, and trends. (www.investopedia.com/terms/h/
hedgefund.asp)
Family Ofﬁces Group : The educational web site of the largest fam-
ily ofﬁce networking association in the wealth management in-dustry. It contains over 500 articles and videos on family ofﬁces.
(http://FamilyOfﬁcesGroup.com)
Hedge Funds Research Guide, Harvard Baker Library : A great resource
put together by Harvard University on hedge funds. It is a bit
dated now but still holds valuable leads to additional resources.
(www.library.hbs.edu/guides/hedgefunds/index
print.html)
HedgeFundMessageBoard.com : Industry forum for hedge fund pro-
fessionals and hedge fund managers. (http://HedgeFundMessageBoard.com)
PrimeBrokerageGuide.com: The number one web site on the hedge fund
prime brokerage niche industry. (http://primebrokerageguide.com)Glossary
Following is a list of top hedge fund and alternative investment terms and
keywords that are important to understand if you are going to work in
the hedge fund industry.
alpha Alpha goes a step further than excess return and adds risk to the equation.
Alpha is the portfolio’s risk-adjusted performance or the “value added” pro-
vided by a manager. Mathematically, alpha is the incremental difference between
a manager’s actual results and his expected results, given the level of risk. A pos-
itive alpha indicates that a portfolio has produced returns above the expected
level—at the same level of risk—and a negative alpha suggests the portfolio
underperformed given the level of risk assumed.
back ofﬁce The back ofﬁce staff deal with trade processing, reconciliation, and cash
management. They also perform administrative functions that support the trad-ing of securities, including record keeping, trade conﬁrmation, trade settlement,
and regulatory compliance. If used in sales, the back ofﬁce fulﬁlls customers’
orders and may usually perform the duties involved in customer support call
centers.
beta Beta is a measure of sensitivity to the market benchmark, or how volatile
a security or portfolio is relative to the whole market. A diversiﬁed portfoliowith a beta of 1.0 would indicate that the portfolio would respond in tandem
with the market. A beta greater than 1.0 indicates that a portfolio would be
more responsive to market movements, while a beta below 1.0 would indicate a
muted response. Aggressive investors may choose portfolios with higher betas,
while defensive investors may focus on low-beta investments.
broker A broker acts as an agent or intermediary for a buyer and a seller. The buyer,
seller, and broker may all be individuals, or one or more may be a business orother institution. For example, a stockbroker works for a brokerage ﬁrm and
handles client orders to buy or sell stocks, bonds, commodities, and options in
return for a commission or asset-based fee. A ﬂoor broker handles buy and sell
orders on the ﬂoor of a securities or commodities exchange. A real estate broker
represents the seller in a real estate transaction and receives a commission on
the sale.
buy side The buy side consists of institutional investors, which includes insurance
companies, mutual funds, pension funds, endowment funds, and hedge funds.
The buy side refers to ﬁrms that buy and sell as customers of these market
makers, usually taking speculative positions or making relative value trades.
179The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 180 GLOSSARY
Calmar and Sterling ratios Calmar and Sterling ratios are well suited for presenting
the worst-case picture since they take into account maximum drawdown—that
is, the worst possible losing streak. This feature causes them to be used exten-sively in hedge fund applications.
capital introduction services This is a process whereby the prime broker attempts
to introduce its hedge fund clients to qualiﬁed hedge fund investors who have
an interest in exploring new opportunities to make hedge fund investments.
chief compliance ofﬁcer (CCO) A CCO is primarily responsible for overseeing
and managing compliance issues in an organization. The responsibilities ofthe position often include leading enterprise compliance efforts; designing and
implementing internal controls, policies, and procedures to assure compliance
with applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations and third-party
guidelines; managing audits and investigations into regulatory and compliance
issues; and responding to requests for information from regulatory bodies.
clearing Clearing denotes all activities from the time a commitment is made for
a transaction until it is settled. It involves the management of post-trading,
presettlement credit exposures to ensure that trades are settled in accordance
with market rules, even if a buyer or seller should become insolvent prior to
settlement.
Commodities and Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) The Commodities and
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) is an independent agency of the U.S.
government. The main objectives of the CFTC are to protect market users and
the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices related to the sale of
commodity and ﬁnancial futures and options; and to foster open, competitive,
and ﬁnancially sound futures and option markets.
custodian A custodian is a ﬁnancial institution responsible for safeguarding a ﬁrm’s
or individual’s ﬁnancial assets. The role of a custodian in such a case would be
the following: to hold in safekeeping assets such as equities and bonds, arrange
settlement of any purchases and sales of such securities, collect information on
and income from such assets, provide information on the underlying companies
and their annual general meetings, manage cash transactions, perform foreign
exchange transactions where required, and provide regular reporting on all their
activities to their clients.
dark pool Dark pools offer institutional investors liquidity that is not displayed
on order books. This is useful for traders who wish to move large numbers of
shares without revealing themselves to the open market.
dealer A dealer is an individual or a ﬁrm that buys assets for and sells assets from
its own portfolio, as opposed to bringing buyers and sellers together. Dealers, or
principals, buy and sell securities for their own accounts, adding liquidity to the
marketplace and seeking to proﬁt from the spread between the prices at which
they buy and sell. Dealers are sometimes able to offer investors better prices,
but they may tend to make recommendations based on their own ownership
positions.
drawdown A drawdown is measured from the time a retrenchment begins to when a
new high is reached. This method is used because a valley can’t be measured untilGlossary 181
a new high occurs. Once the new high is reached, the percentage change from
the old high to the smallest trough is recorded. Drawdowns help determine
an investment’s ﬁnancial risk. An analyst can use this as a tool to compare asecurity’s possible reward to its risk.
execution Execution is the act of ﬁlling an order to buy or sell a security. That is,
when a broker executes an order, he actually makes a trade on behalf of the
client. The date of execution is known as the trade date.
front ofﬁce The front ofﬁce deals with the positioning of trade, hedging, and value
at risk (VAR). The primary objective is to trade actively and manage liquidity.
fund administration services Fund administration services are a set of activities that
are carried out in support of the actual process of running a hedge fund. Services
include the calculation of the net asset value (NAV), including the calculation of
the fund’s income and expense accruals, preparation of semiannual and annual
accounts, maintenance of the fund’s ﬁnancial books and records, payment of
the fund’s expenses, and supervision of the orderly liquidation and dissolution
of the fund.
fund of hedge funds A fund of hedge funds is an investment company that invests
in hedge funds rather than in individual securities. Some funds of hedge funds
register their securities with the SEC. These funds of hedge funds must provide
investors with a prospectus and must ﬁle certain reports quarterly with the SEC.
They hold a diversiﬁed portfolio of generally uncorrelated hedge funds that may
be widely diversiﬁed or focused on a speciﬁc sector or geographical location.
hedge fund Hedge funds pool the investors’ money and invest in ﬁnancial instru-
ments in order to make positive returns. They pursue absolute returns on their
underlying instruments. Every hedge fund has its own investment strategy that
determines the type of investments and the methods of investment it undertakes.
There are over 14 different investment strategies in which hedge funds invest,
and each has its own risk and return. Hedge funds, as a class, invest in a broad
range of investments including shares, debt, and commodities. They are able to
take speculative positions in derivative securities such as options and have the
ability to short-sell stocks. This will typically increase the leverage—and thus
the risk—of the fund. This also means that it’s possible for hedge funds to
make money when the market is falling. Hedge funds are only available to a
speciﬁc group of sophisticated investors with high net worth. The U.S. govern-
ment deems them “accredited investors,” and the criteria for becoming one are
lengthy and restrictive.
high-water mark A hedge fund applies a high-water mark to an investor’s money;
this means that the manager will only receive performance fees on that particular
pool of invested money when its current value is greater than its previous greatest
value. If the investment drops in value, then the manager must bring it back
above the previous greatest value before he can receive performance fees again.
hurdle rate The hurdle rate is an established minimum return that an investor’s
investment must earn to the application of performance/incentive fees.
kurtosis The scaled fourth power of observations in the tail distribution is kurto-
sis. The classical interpretation of kurtosis is that it measures both peakedness182 GLOSSARY
and tail heaviness of a distribution relative to that of the normal distribution.
Consequently, its use is restricted to symmetric distributions. A high kurtosis
portrays a chart with fat tails and a low, even distribution, whereas a low kur-tosis portrays a chart with skinny tails and a distribution concentrated toward
the mean. It is also called the volatility of volatility.
leverage Leverage is the extent to which a fund is utilizing borrowed money.
A highly leveraged fund or company is considered a risky investment because it
might not ﬁnd lenders in the future. Leverage is not always bad, however; it can
make both gains and losses much more extreme than otherwise possible.
management fee The management fee is calculated as a percentage of a fund’s net
asset value. The fee may range from 1 to 4 percent, but 2 percent is the standard
ﬁgure. This is the fee intended to compensate the managers for professionally
managing the investor’s assets.
omega The omega measure provides the information about benchmark returns that
is relevant in the tail of the distribution curve. Omega calculations involve a com-
plicated framework, but it captures all the information about portfolio returns
and expresses it in a manner that is intuitive from an investment performance
viewpoint.
performance fee The performance fee or incentive fee is calculated as a percentage
of the fund’s proﬁt, considering both realized and unrealized gains. Typically
the fund manager charges 20 percent of the returns as a performance fee.
prime brokerage This is a package of services offered by the investment banks
to the hedge funds. The advantage that a hedge fund enjoys is that the prime
broker provides a centralized securities clearing facility for the hedge fund, and
the hedge fund’s collateral requirements are netted across all deals handled
by the prime broker. The prime broker in turn beneﬁts by earning fees on
ﬁnancing the client’s long and short cash and security positions, and by charging,
in some cases, fees for clearing and/or other services.
redemptions Redemptions are withdrawals from hedge funds by investors which
are sometimes subject to lock-up periods, gating clauses, or other terms.
risk budgeting Risk budgeting is the process of decomposing the aggregate risk of a
portfolio into its constituents on a quantitative basis; setting risk limits to each
asset class, factor, and/or investment manager; allocating assets in compliance
with risk budgets; monitoring the use or abuse of risk budgets on an ongoing
basis; analyzing the results; and improving the investment process.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) The U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) exists to protect investors; to maintain fair, orderly, and
efﬁcient markets; and to facilitate capital formation.
sell side Banks and brokers are the main constituents of the sell side. The term refers
to ﬁrms that take orders from buy side ﬁrms and then work the orders. Sell side
ﬁrms are paid through commissions charged on the sales price of the stock. Sell
side ﬁrms employ research analysts, traders, and salespeople who collectively
strive to generate ideas and execute trades for buy side ﬁrms, enticing them to
do business.
Sharpe ratio The Sharpe ratio considers total risk and is more suitable for diversiﬁed
portfolios. The ratio is most commonly used because it has desirable properties,Glossary 183
such as proportionality to the t-statistic (for returns in excess of zero) and
the centrality of the Sharpe ratio squared to optimal portfolio allocation. But
the ratio is leverage invariant and does not incorporate correlations and risksinvolving higher movements.
short-sell Short-selling is the sale of a security that the seller does not own, or a
sale that is completed by the delivery of a security borrowed by the seller. Short-
sellers assume that they will be able to buy the stock at a lower amount than
the price at which they sold short. Short-sellers make money if the stock price
goes down.
soft dollar A soft dollar payment is a payment made by institutional investment
funds to their service providers. Usually soft dollars are incorporated into bro-
kerage fees, and the expenses they pay for may not be reported directly.
Sortino ratio The Sortino ratio adjusts by drawdown. The ratio does not consider
up movements in volatility but only underperformance and some threshold of
MAR. Sortino can look deceptively high/favorable (upon trend reversal) if the
ex-post estimation is based on a period of upwardly trending returns, since
downside deviation underestimates the two-sided risk if the estimation period
is not long enough to include loss periods.
standard deviation The standard deviation is often used by investors to measure
the risk of a stock or a stock portfolio. The basic idea is that the standard
deviation is a measure of volatility: The more a stock’s returns vary from the
stock’s average return, the more volatile the stock.
third-party marketing Third-party marketing, in the context of a hedge fund def-
inition, refers to a set of sales and marketing services offered to hedge fund
managers by specialized marketing ﬁrms. Provided services may include the
production of marketing materials such as pamphlets and spreadsheets, the
management of advertising in media, analyzing investment market statistics,
and customer relations management. The role of third-party marketing ﬁrms is
to serve as a bridge between fund managers and potential investors. Third-party
marketing ﬁrms can offer recommendations; contact assistance; and compar-
ative ratings of hedge fund risk ratings, performance in the market, and fee
structures.

