Additional Praise for The Hedge Fund Book
“Those new to the hedge fund industry will beneﬁt immensely from the
chapter devoted to answering frequently asked question about hedge funds
as well as the easy-to-understand explanations of all major areas of hedge
funds throughout the book. Experienced hedge fund professionals readingthis book will also gain valuable insight from other managers and service
providers on current issues facing hedge funds. Whether you are looking
to raise more capital, improve your fund’s operations and due diligence,launch a new hedge fund, or just learn more about hedge funds, this book
is a must-read.”
—Theo O’Brien , Associate, Private Equity Investment Group
“Richard’s new book is a terriﬁc testament to the knowledge that he and
his team have of the hedge fund industry. From novice to expert hedgers, I
recommend this training manual. Its information makes for a sharp, timely
evaluation of where hedge funds are and where they are likely to be heading.”
—Thomas J. Powell , CEO, ELP Capital Advisers, Inc; Author, Standing in
the Rain: Understanding, Surviving and Thriving in the Worst Financial
Storm since the Great Depression .
“Richard Wilson is the best single source for practical answers on the hedge
fund industry. For people new to the industry or considering launching their
own fund, look no further. You’ll ﬁnd it all here.”
—Richard Zahm , Portfolio Manager, Second Angel Fund I
“This book caters to hedge fund aspirants as well as ﬁnance professionals.
Richard does a wonderful job of demystifying any misconceptions that the
hedge fund industry faces today. Through a combination of interviews with
industry professionals, a top down approach to both the basic and morecomplex nuances of running a hedge fund and colorful examples of the
industry, Richard has been able to achieve what so many other hedge fund
books aspire to. To capture the reader in both an enjoyable and informativebook that will soon become a standard in the ﬁnance education industry.”
—Curtis Birchall , Longbow Capital, Inc.
“The Hedge Fund Book provides an “inside baseball” look at the hedge
fund industry and should be required reading for someone looking to getinto the business.”
—Scott Freund , Senior Family Wealth Advisor, GCC Family
Wealth Management“I wish this book had been around when we got started. This piece acceler-
ates the ramping up period for hedge fund management company foundersand executives. Most people think that to have a hedge fund all you need is
a good trader and a Bloomberg terminal. They are shocked when they learn
what it really takes to be successful. This book does a phenomenal job of
explaining and exploring these keys to success.”
—Pratik Sharma , Hedge Fund Manager
“The Hedge Fund Book is one of the few books that speciﬁcally address
the “business” of hedge funds. Make no mistake, running a hedge fund
is a business just like any brick and mortar store that requires attention
to operations, sales and marketing, compliance, etc. as well as investmentreturns. Now more then ever, institutional investors are placing an emphasis
on back/middle ofﬁce functions. The Hedge Fund Book offers practical
insight and advice from seasoned professionals on these overlooked aspectsof a hedge fund business.”
—Nakul Nayyar , U.S. Long/Short Hedge Fund Trader
“The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for Professional and Capital
Raising Executives by Richard Wilson is an excellent guide for established
and developing hedge fund managers, and can be used as a point of reference
in the administration of best practices of hedge funds and investor relations.”
—Valerie Emanuel , President, Valerie Emanuel & AssociatesThe Hedge
Fund Book
A Training Manual
for Professionals and
Capital-Raising Executives
RICHARD C. WILSON
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Copyright C/circlecopyrt2010 by Richard C. Wilson. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web
at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any impliedwarranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with aprofessional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside
the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Wilson, Richard C.
The hedge fund book : a training manual for professionals and capital-raising executives /
Richard Wilson.
p. cm. – (Wiley ﬁnance series)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-52063-5 (cloth)
1. Hedge funds. I. Title.
HG4530.W546 2010
332.64
/prime524–dc22
2010003434
Printed in the United States of America.
1 0987654321This book is dedicated to my wife, Adriana Wilson, for being
a wonderful person and a constant balancing force in my life.
Despite my passion for business and marketing, the Brazilian
in her makes sure that on some level I work
to live and not live to work.Contents
Preface xi
My Story xii
Disclosure of Financial Interests xiii
Acknowledgments xv
Introduction 1
CHAPTER 1
Hedge Fund Fundamentals 5
Hedge Fund Mechanics and Statistics 6
History of Hedge Funds 8Media Portrayal of Hedge Funds 9
Hedge Fund Ecosystem 10
Future of the Hedge Fund Industry 13Chapter Summary 13
Review Questions 14
CHAPTER 2
Institutionalization and Operations 17
Stephen Abrahams, Vice President of Marketing for a
London-Based Hedge Fund 18
Bob Pardo, CEO and President, Pardo Capital Limited 19
Vinod Paul, Managing Director of Service and Business
Development, Eze Castle Integration 21
Nakul Nayyar, Quantitative Trading/Support, Quad Capital 24
Hendrik Klein, CEO, Da Vinci Invest Ltd. 26
Sheri Kanesaka, Associate, Michelman & Robinson, LLP 29
Eric Warshal, CEO, Fund Associates 30Lance Baraker and William Katts, Senior Managing
Directors, TradeStation Prime 32
Chapter Summary 36Review Questions 36
viiviii CONTENTS
CHAPTER 3
Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 39
Bad News 40
Public Relations Management 41
Educational Marketing 42Forget about Contacting More Investors 43
E-Mail Marketing Best Practices 45
Copy Writing 49Case Proﬁle 50
Stephen Abrahams, Vice President of Marketing for a
London-Based Hedge Fund 54
Pratik Sharma, Managing Director, Atyant Capital 55
Hendrik Klein, CEO, Da Vinci Invest Ltd. 59
Chapter Summary 60Review Questions 61
CHAPTER 4
The Shooting Star 63
18 Lessons from Shooting Star Hedge Funds 63
Rick Nummi, Partner and General Counsel,
Accounting and Compliance International (ACI) 65
Thomas Powell, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer, ELP Capital 72
Chapter Summary 74
Review Questions 74
CHAPTER 5
Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 77
Top Five Tips for Starting a Hedge Fund 78
Hedge Fund Pitch Book Creation 80
Syed Ali, CEO, Saturn Partners, LLC 81
Nakul Nayyar, Quantitative Trading/Support, Quad Capital 86Chapter Summary 89
Review Questions 90
CHAPTER 6
Dedicated to Due Diligence 93
Scott Freund, President, GCC Family Wealth Management 94
Brian Reich, President and Founder, Atrato Advisors LLC 95
Richard Wilson, Hedge Fund Group, CHP
Designation, HedgeFundBlogger.com 98
Due Diligence Effects on Hedge Funds 102Contents ix
Chapter Summary 105
Review Questions 106
CHAPTER 7
Giant Hedge Funds 109
Best Practices from $1 Billion-Plus Hedge Funds 109
Richard Zahm, Portfolio Manager, Second Angel Fund 111
Scott Cohen, President and CEO, Hedge Solutions 117Chapter Summary 119
Review Questions 120
CHAPTER 8
Governance Best Practices 123
Andrew Main, Managing Partner, Stratton Street
Capital LLP 124
David R. Koenig, CEO of the Governance Fund, LLC 130
Chapter Summary 134Review Questions 134
CHAPTER 9
Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 137
Hedge Funds 101 137
Hedge Fund Operations 139Hedge Fund Marketing and Sales 142
Hedge Fund Careers 156
APPENDIX A
Bonuses of $1,779 169
APPENDIX B
Example Due Diligence Questions 171
Questionnaire 171
APPENDIX C
Top Hedge Fund Web Sites 177
Glossary 179
About the Author 185
Index 187
Contact the Author 191Preface
This book was created as a training manual for professionals who work
in the hedge fund industry or who would like to work more closely with
hedge funds as clients or business partners. Over the past seven years I have
read most of the hedge fund books that are available. There are great books
on hedge fund investment strategies, the history of hedge funds, ﬁnancial
modeling, and risk management. I never could ﬁnd a book, though, that
provided unﬁltered advice, insights, and hard lessons learned from hedge
fund managers. This gap in the marketplace and the growing needs of our
Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional (CHP) Designation program is what ledto this book being created.
Within this book, I hope that every reader will learn:
/squaresolidHow hedge fund managers of any hedge fund may increase their oper-ational effectiveness immediately.
/squaresolidWhy most hedge fund managers struggle to raise capital, and how being
proactive within the right areas can allow a small team to raise a large
amount of capital.
/squaresolidHow to implement governance best practices that will improve investor
conﬁdence, enhance decision-making processes, and decrease the risk of
some types of fraud.
/squaresolidHow to emulate the best practices of $1 billion-plus giant hedge funds
that have learned many lessons the hard way.
/squaresolidWhy what you read about hedge funds in the general media is off-base80 percent of the time.
/squaresolidHow to double the effectiveness of your capital-raising efforts by focus-
ing on your unique process and positioning more than on your numbers.
/squaresolidHow small to medium-size hedge funds in the real world are improving
their business structure and processes without spending millions on
infrastructure.
The intended audience for this book includes CHP Designation par-
ticipants, hedge fund managers, professors, traders, third-party marketers,
students, service providers, investors, and consultants. The book provides
xixii PREFACE
a fundamental understanding of how hedge funds operate at a high level,
while also taking the reader down to very granular, real-world steps thathedge fund managers can take to improve how they manage risk, operate,
select service providers, govern their own organization, and raise capital.
This text should help readers shortcut the process of interviewing 30 hedge
fund managers and veterans, by providing their advice, tips, strategies, and
painful lessons learned here within one concise book. If you add up all
the time of the managers and consultants who were involved within theseinterviews, the book contains over $80,500 worth of advice yet costs less
than $75.
In addition to the chapters of the book that focus on niche subjects
such as institutionalization, capital raising, governance, or best practices of
$1 billion-plus hedge funds, this book contains multimedia resources that
should help the reader comprehend and absorb the advice provided herein.
We have created over 50 video and audio resources, which you will see
referenced through this book. These may be used to supplement universitycourse lectures or sent to team members who may also want to learn more
about hedge funds and how they operate. To access these resources, please
visit HedgeFundTraining.com.
MY STORY
To provide some background as to why this book was written, here’s a shortexplanation of how I entered the hedge fund industry. My ﬁrst experience inworking with hedge funds was in 2001 when I completed an internship for
a currency/commodity-based hedge fund in Europe. I helped them complete
leading-indicator trading research on the currencies and commodities ofJapan, New Zealand, and Australia and analyzed the relationships between
them.
After completing this work, I started learning more about marketing
and sales and found myself drawn more to ﬁnding out how to raise capital
and connect with investors. This led me to independently negotiate and signcontracts to raise capital for a boutique investment bank in New York and
one of the early fund of hedge funds groups based out of South Africa.
I helped them raise capital by identifying potential institutional investors,completing market research, and reaching out to investors.
After working within this area while also consulting within the area of
risk management for three years, I took a position with a third-party market-ing ﬁrm. This ﬁrm raised capital for three to ﬁve fund clients at a time, and
I was in charge of completing the hands-on marketing of three clients: an
$80 billion long-only portfolio optimization ﬁrm, a $30 million U.S. hedgePreface xiii
fund manager, and an $800 million global macro hedge fund manager. This
unique set of clients and my responsibilities of researching new potential in-vestors, building organic investor databases, e-mailing investors, completing
educational marketing, calling investors, working conferences, and creating
marketing materials taught me a lot about how things should and should
not be done. In this role I raised a depressing $0 the ﬁrst 11 months, and
then started raising $100,000 a week. Eventually, after 18 months, raising
a minimum of $1 million to $3 million a week.
While marketing these funds, I found that due to the fragmented struc-
ture of the industry, most fund marketers simply follow their competitors’
strategies. In addition, most have few resources to leverage, focus little onpositioning, complete no capital-raising training, and ignore the power of
writing strong copy and using educational approaches to marketing to in-
vestors. At the same time, my online networking association, the Hedge
Fund Group, grew to over 30,000 members and my blog, HedgeFundBlog-
ger.com, was taking off and quickly became the number one most widelyvisited web site on hedge funds.
I decided to ﬂy solo and start my own ﬁrm in 2008. We now run three
main product and service lines:
1.Our training programs such as the CHP Designation, Hedge Fund
Startup Kit, and Hedge Fund Marketing Mechanics hedge funds
2.Our blog network on hedge funds, private equity, mutual funds, al-
ternative investments and capital raising where we provide over 5,000
original articles, videos, and interviews
3.Our capital-raising tools and investor databases, which have now been
used by over 1,600 fund managers and include HedgeFundDirectoryPro.
com, HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com, PrivateEquityDirectory.com,
Investor Databases.com, and CapitalRaiserPro.com
Our ﬁrm and team are small but growing. We have a total of 25 full- and
part-time employees and contractors now who help us offer and constantly
update the CHP Designation, blogs, and these capital-raising tools.
DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS
In the spirit of transparency and full disclosure which I recommend withinthis text, I think it is only appropriate to disclose my own interests. I wasonly able to write this book based on my current relationships, consulting
projects, capital-raising experience, and services that my ﬁrm offers. Because
of this, there are overlaps between examples in this book and my ownxiv PREFACE
clients and products. For example, I have asked my closest circle of 30 or
so clients to review my book for feedback or a quote. Also, three out of the25 professionals I interviewed within this book have used my consulting
services in the past, and my ﬁrm has ﬁnancial interests and/or ownership
in the following web sites and resources mentioned within the rest of this
book: CHP Designation (HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com), InvestorDatabases
.com, HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com, PrimeBrokerageGuide.com, Third
PartyMarketing.com, HedgeFundBlogger.com, HedgeFundStartupGuru.com, ThirdPartyMarketing.com, HedgeFundsBook.com, HedgeFund
Premium.com, and FamilyOfﬁcesDatabase.com. My hope is that the over
250 hours of consulting advice and over 50 video modules within this bookare worth far more than any distraction by the handful of mentions of the
web sites or services that we provide.Acknowledgments
Thank you to my father, Thomas Wilson, for pushing me to write my
ﬁrst “real book” based on the consulting, marketing, and writing I have
already done. Thank you to my wife, Adriana, for patiently supporting me
in everything we have been aiming to accomplish. Thank you to Jonathan
King, who woke me up and spurred me to stop ﬂoating through business, to
take control of where I was headed, and to work toward something greater
than average.
Also, a quick thank-you to someone who is probably too busy to ever
read this sentence: Jeffrey Gitomer. If it were not for the inspiration obtainedthrough his writing, I would have never learned to kick my own or started a
blog, newsletter, or book. My constant push to give away more writing and
free educational materials can be attributed directly to Gitomer.
Above all else, thank you to the more than 900,000 professionals who
have e-mailed our team, downloaded our free hedge fund blog book, com-
pleted our CHP Designation hedge fund training program, and used ourcapital, raising resources. Your support, loyalty, and feedback are what
drove me to publish this text, and have been the source of ideas for every
product and service we offer. Thank you for sharing your time and thoughtswith me.
xvIntroduction
What if you sat down with 30 hedge fund veterans and picked their brains?
What if you spent over $80,000 hiring professionals with seven to
30 or more years of experience to provide you their insights on what isdeveloping in the hedge fund industry, and what is important now?
This is the premise on which I constructed The Hedge Fund Book:
A Training Manual for Professionals and Capital-Raising Executives .
This book is a discussion, a captured forum, not a dissertation, letter to
Congress, or formal legal document. You will ﬁnd less formality here thanin most books, because that is how I am used to writing and transferringknowledge through speeches, e-mails, and blog posts. Some may appreciate
this approach and form of communication; others will surely not.
The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for Professionals and
Capital-Raising Executives will provide many beneﬁts to those seeking to
understand and work in this ﬁeld. Our team at the Hedge Fund Group has
raised millions of dollars of capital for hedge funds and personally workedwith over 1,000 fund managers over the past several years. In the past we
have freely shared our knowledge through our blogs, which you may still
access today. They include:
/squaresolidHedgeFundBlogger.com
/squaresolidHedgeFundsCareer.com
/squaresolidThirdPartyMarketing.com
/squaresolidFamilyOfﬁcesGroup.com
/squaresolidHedgeFundStartupGuru.com
/squaresolidCommoditiesAndFuturesGuide.com
/squaresolidPrimeBrokerageGuide.com
/squaresolidPrivateEquityBlogger.com
In addition to the more than 10,000 articles provided in these blogs,
our free e-book has also been downloaded more than 100,000 times. Thesearticles and resources were given away freely to develop relationships with
those who found value in the resources.
In an effort to now make this book worth more than the retail price, we
include many diverse types of educational resources including case studies,
1The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 2 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
examples, interviews, best practices, review questions, and video resources
to help readers learn more about hedge funds. These interviews and videoswere produced by hedge fund principals and consultants who normally
either do not provide such advice or typically charge $200 to $475 per hour
for their time. My hope is that the value of these additional resources alone
will be worth more than what you paid to obtain this book. If you add up
the 250-plus hours that went into putting this book together with all of the
experienced professionals we interviewed, there is more than $80,500 worthof advice contained in this text. Here are some more details on the different
resources included in this text and how they operate:
/squaresolidInterviews . Over 20 interviews complete this training manual for the
hedge fund industry, including many of the full transcripts in this text.
The advice comes directly from numerous veterans in the industry, so
individual readers do not need to interview all of them directly.
/squaresolidVideo resources. We have also created a series of over 40 video resources
which act as a supplement to this training manual. Throughout this book
there are references to speciﬁc video resources, and the complete list ofvideos available may be seen at http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Videos.
/squaresolidFrequently asked questions. Our team at the Hedge Fund Group has
received and sent over 800,000 e-mails since our ﬁrm was started in2007. We have received thousands of e-mails on capital raising, starting
a hedge fund, institutionalization, and hedge fund careers. I have used
about 40 of the most frequent of these questions to create Chapter 9 of
this book. Some professionals may ﬁnd this resource more valuable than
the rest of the chapter-by-chapter instruction and interview content.
/squaresolidWhy important. Each chapter begins with a short section on why the
chapter is critical to the health and growth of the hedge fund as a
business. This provision guides the reader as to which chapters will bemost relevant to his particular career or business.
/squaresolidChapter review questions. Each chapter concludes with several review
questions for those professors and trainers who have agreed to use thismanual as part of their university course. These will also be helpful
for those who are completing the hedge fund training and certiﬁcation
program referred to in this text as the Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional(CHP) Designation Program (www.HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com).
I recently participated in a training session with Eben Pagan in Los
Angeles at a marketing conference on how business is typically conducted.He told an interesting story. Eben spoke about how the streets in Boston
are actually old cow paths that the city decided to just pave over to create
the roads of the city. The result is a very complicated maze of one-wayIntroduction 3
streets that really only make sense to the most veteran cab drivers. This
is not the cows’ fault. They simply walked typically in the direction ofleast resistance. Nobody stepped back and looked at where the cows had
wandered and asked if there was a better way to get the project done—they
simply followed where cows had walked in the past.
Eben’s point in telling this story was that in every business, every form
of marketing, and even in the hedge fund business, there are cow paths
everywhere. The question is whether you and your business are wanderingaround on the cow paths of what others have done in the past, or building
a super highway straight toward your goal.
Areas to examine for hedge fund managers could include hiring, cap-
ital raising, employee management, performance reporting, transparency,
governance, and investor relations. It helps to step back and look at com-
petitors, other industries, and steps needed to complete the work we are
trying to complete, to see if there is a more direct or efﬁcient way of fully
accomplishing it.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund cow paths, please type this URL intoyour Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/CowCHAPTER 1
Hedge Fund Fundamentals
Training is everything. The peach was once a bitter almond;
cauliﬂower is nothing but cabbage with a college education.
—Mark Twain
This chapter provides a brief 20,000-foot-view introduction to hedge funds
and provides a context for the content of this book. In this chapter I brieﬂy
cover the history of hedge funds, important deﬁnitions, the hedge fund
ecosystem, media portrayal of hedge funds, ﬁve industry trends, regulations,
and the future of hedge funds.
Why important : This chapter is the foundation for the rest of this book.
If you have more than ﬁve years of industry experience, you may want toskim this chapter and skip to the chapter review questions to check yourlevel of industry knowledge.
What this chapter is not : This book is not a thorough review of hedge
fund investment strategies or analytics; those topics are already covered in
dozens of other texts, including two that are required in the Certiﬁed Hedge
Fund Professional (CHP) Designation Program. See these required books
and other recommendations at HedgeFundBookstore.com.
What isa hedge fund? The one-sentence deﬁnition of a hedge fund is
“a private investment vehicle that charges its investors two types of fees: a
management fee and a performance fee.” Any more speciﬁc deﬁnition will
lead to conﬂicts in the industry today, as it has grown in many directions.
The management fee is a standard fee based on total assets under manage-ment and it typically runs between 1 and 2 percent. The second type of fee
typically charged by hedge funds is a performance fee; typically this is 10 to
20 percent and is charged based on the performance achieved by the fund.If a hedge fund has 10 percent positive performance for a single year and its
performance fee is 20 percent, the hedge fund’s management would get to
5The Hedge Fund Book: A Training Manual for 
Professionals and Capital-Raising Executives  
by Richard C. Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Richard C. Wilson 6 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
keep 2 percent of that 10 percent gain as part of their proﬁts, a reward for
achieving these positive returns for their investors.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
Watch a video explaining what a hedge fund is and is not, here:HedgeFundTraining.com/What-is-a-Hedge-Fund?
HEDGE FUND MECHANICS AND STATISTICS
It is important to know that while these fee ﬁgures just mentioned are typical,the hedge fund industry has become competitive and diverse. There are nowhedge funds operating that charge a 0 percent management fee while others
charge 3 percent. Wide variations in performance fee levels may also be
seen. One important aspect of this dual-level fee structure is the incentiveit sets in place for hedge fund managers. While many hedge fund managers
have already invested their own assets in the portfolio they are managing,
remunerating the managers based on positive performance and not just totalassets under management rewards those who can achieve consistent year-
after-year gains. This in turn leads to rich compensation for those who can
outperform the majority, and it attracts the best of talent to the industry. Aportfolio manager can potentially earn two to three times as much working
for a hedge fund as he could working for a similar size mutual fund or
long-only optimization ﬁrm.
Investments made in hedge funds are typically seen as medium to long
term for several reasons. The main reason is liquidity. Most hedge funds
have lock-up periods of one to two years, and many restrict redemptions
for as long as three years after the initial investment is made. A lock-up
period simply means that the investor may not redeem his invested fundsuntil this period has expired. These lock-up periods are put into place so
that the hedge fund may invest in various assets and will have more control
and ﬂexibility in the timing of its purchasing and selling of these assets over
time. Without lock-up periods, a manager may make a long-term investment
in a security, for example, and a new investor could come and request his
assets back during a weak point in the markets, forcing the manager to sellthe security at a loss to meet that redemption request. While lock-up periods
help managers in running their funds, they are seen as a major concern and
drawback by institutions and high net worth (HNW) investors. While thisHedge Fund Fundamentals 7
book does not cover hedge fund replication or publicly traded hedge funds,
these are two areas worth additional research if this topic is of interest tothe reader.
There are between 100,000 and 150,000 professionals who work
directly within the hedge fund industry and another 1,000,000-plus pro-
fessionals who work with hedge funds in some way, indirectly or as part of
a broader platform of services. There are between 10,000 and 25,000 hedge
funds in existence today, depending on whose statistics and databases youtrust most, and new funds are launched daily. The average hedge fund has
just around $40 million in assets under management (AUM), while many
start with just $500,000 to $5 million, and a larger group runs over $1 billionin assets.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund liquidity and lock-up periods, pleasetype this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
Liquidity
Additional Common Hedge Fund Terms
/squaresolidHurdle rate : A hurdle rate is a set performance ﬁgure that must
be achieved before any performance fees will be calculated or paidto the hedge fund manager. For example, a hedge fund may have its
hurdle rate set at 3 percent so that any performance above 3 percent
will be considered outperformance. Hurdle rates avoid having investorspay high fees for low-single-digit portfolio performance.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the deﬁnition of a hurdle rate, please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Hurdle
/squaresolidHigh-water mark: A high-water mark is a tool by which hedge fund
managers can assure investors that they will not be charged performance8 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
fees after portfolio losses until the fund has made up those past losses.
In other words, if a hedge fund manager has a loss of 5 percent inone year, he may not be paid any performance fees in the following
year until he has ﬁrst regained that loss, restoring the fund to the high-
water mark point. Again, the high-water mark protects investors from
paying the performance fee until the manager has made up the ground
he previously lost in the portfolio.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the deﬁnition of a high-water mark, please
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
High
/squaresolidGating clause: A gating clause allows a hedge fund manager, under
certain circumstances, to restrict or completely cut off redemptions fromthe portfolio due to market illiquidity or speciﬁc sets of circumstances
set forth in the contract. This term has been highly debated recently due
to hundreds of funds “closing the gate” or enacting this clause in theiragreements with investors.
For more deﬁnitions, please see the Glossary at the back of this book.
HISTORY OF HEDGE FUNDS
Financial journalist, author, and sociologist Alfred W. Jones started the ﬁrst
hedge fund in 1949 while working for Fortune . The fund was started on the
belief that the movements of individual securities were due to both the per-
formance of that speciﬁc security and the performance of the broader mar-kets. His strategy was to address this by investing in securities that seemed
to be positioned to outperform the market, while shorting (see Glossary) or
selling those securities that seemed likely to underperform the market. Thegoal was to neutralize or cancel out market risk by allowing the portfolio
to hedge against negative market movements. This is how the ﬁrst hedge
fund was created. This idea was unique in that it was designed to do well,or at least relatively well, during volatile or even bear market conditions.
This new method of managing portfolios of equities started becoming
popular in the 1960s, and by the 1970s there were over 150 hedge fundsHedge Fund Fundamentals 9
in existence managing close to $1 billion in assets. Some early hedge fund
managers were Warren Buffett, Michael Steinhardt, and George Soros. Sincethen hedge funds have evolved to include commodities, bonds, real estate,
and other types of assets.
Over time, the term hedge fund took on the broader deﬁnition of a gen-
eral private investment partnership, which typically includes management
and performance fees as the only common denominator. Even this deﬁni-
tion is now becoming dated as more hedge funds and ﬁrms that run hedgefunds become publicly traded companies. Hedge funds are hard to under-
stand as a whole because they are diverse and somewhat secretive. Hedge
funds are secretive because of strict advertising and public offering rulesas well as to keep their investment process, trading strategy, and positions
from their competition. The hedge fund industry is very competitive and
entrepreneurial.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the history of the hedge fund industry, please
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/History
MEDIA PORTRAYAL OF HEDGE FUNDS
Along the way there have been hedge fund blowups (that have had perfor-mance dives and made public headlines), fraud cases, insider trading, andmisreporting. While the whole idea of what a hedge fund does has been
growing, public knowledge of these vehicles is still relatively limited and
misunderstood, and hedge funds are often in the bottom 1 percent of the in-
dustry in terms of ethics or performance that makes the headlines each day.
Hedge funds are now mentioned in thousands of magazines and newspapers
each month.
There are often misconceptions formed about hedge funds, which are
largely caused by reading mainstream news sources on the topic. Here arethe top three misconceptions caused by the media:
1.Hedge funds are large multibillion-dollar investment vehicles that can
destroy companies. Reality : While the largest of hedge funds do control10 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
a large share of total assets under management, the industry is actually
made up of mostly $1 million to $200 million size hedge fund managers.
2.Hedge funds are not regulated. Reality : Many hedge funds are already
regulated at the asset level based on what they are investing in.
3.Hedge funds are always committing fraud and blowing up their funds.
Reality : Less than 0.1 percent of the industry is ever accused of any
fraud claims, and a 2006 study by Capco shows that over half of all
hedge fund failures are actually due to operational business reasons andnot performance-related issues.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video called “Media Portrayal of Hedge Funds:Misconceptions and Myths,” please type this URL into your Web
browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Media
HEDGE FUND ECOSYSTEM
Hedge fund managers do not work in a vacuum where they coordinate
directly with investors and receive no assistance from outside parties. Most
hedge fund managers work with at least three of the ﬁve types of service
providers shown in Figure 1.1.
It is important to know the function of each of these parties to under-
stand how hedge funds operate, and how they invest and control their
assets. Here are deﬁnitions and explanations for each of these serviceprovider types:
1.Prime brokerage . Prime brokers provide a package of services typi-
cally within the largest business of an investment bank. The following
services are sometimes offered by prime brokers: custody, securities
lending, ﬁnancing, customized technology, operational support, capitalintroduction, and other trading-related services.
2.Fund administration . Fund administration ﬁrms provide support and
operational services to hedge fund managers. These services may in-clude accounting services, operational/ﬁnance services, settlement of
daily trades, calculation and payment of distributions, and payment
of fund expenses.Hedge Fund Fundamentals 11
Prime 
Brokerage
Fund
Administration
Third Party 
MarketingLegal and
ComplianceAuditing
Hedge Fund 
Manager
FIGURE 1.1 Types of Service Providers Used by Hedge Funds
3.Third Party marketing . Third party marketing ﬁrms are independent
hedge fund marketing consultants who work to raise capital for two toﬁve or more hedge funds at any one point in time for a single source of
investors, or for multiple distribution channels. They typically require
some sort of retainer along with sharing of 20 percent of both the
management and performance fees while the funds raised stay invested.
4.Legal and compliance . Legal and compliance ﬁrms become more im-
portant every year within the hedge fund industry. Hedge funds uselaw ﬁrms for complicated formation processes, ongoing business legal
considerations, and ongoing compliance work as well.
5.Auditing. Auditing ﬁrms are used by hedge funds on a quarterly and
annual basis to verify their performance and accounting ﬁgures. Some
hedge funds use auditing ﬁrms for monthly checks or to prepare for an
annual audit as well.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the hedge fund ecosystem, please type this URL
into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Ecosystem12 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Top Four Hedge Fund Industry Trends
Understanding the hedge fund industry requires knowing what is going on
now and also identifying current trends affecting how hedge funds operate,
invest, form, and trade. Following are the top four hedge fund industry
trends:
1.Recent poor absolute hedge fund performance and fraud has led to in-
creasing pressure from investors for additional transparency and levelsof governance. This is being done to ensure that managers adhere to
their investment mandates, only restrict investor liquidity when neces-
sary, and ensure that internal controls, checks, and responsibilities areproperly carried out. Independent administration ﬁrms and directors are
now required by many investors and boards of advisers.
2.The collapse of Lehman Brothers left some hedge funds in London with-
out access to their assets, causing poor performance and in some cases
fund failures. Since this event, hedge funds with over $30 million inassets have been investigating and implementing multi–prime broker-
age models, rather than invite risk by working with one single prime
broker. In the past, prime brokerage ﬁrms would conduct due dili-gence on the soundness of their potential hedge fund clients. Now the
research is done in both directions, with hedge funds screening prime
brokers and vice versa. Some newcomers to the industry are now gain-ing strong market share because they are seen as a safe place to do
business.
3.The use of outside capital-raising resources, investor databases, and
third-party marketing ﬁrms is on the rise. The capital-raising environ-
ment is more competitive, and hedge fund managers are forced to evolve
their investor relationship cultivation systems, capital introduction re-sources, and investor contacts in order to compete.
4.Investors increasingly want to work with more institutional hedge fund
managers. This typically means hedge funds with over $100 million to
$250 million in assets under management. More speciﬁcally, it refers
to the types of operational processes, technology, risk management,trading, and governance features that tend to be in place with funds
that have $1 billion in assets under management. This has always
been a challenge for emerging managers, who have limited access tohigh-pedigree (well respected and accomplished) team members, in-
vestors comfortable with small fund managers, and many times even
the knowledge needed to create a more institutional-quality hedge fundoperation.Hedge Fund Fundamentals 13
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the top four hedge fund trends, please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Trends
FUTURE OF THE HEDGE FUND INDUSTRY
During the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008, many journalists wrote about the deathof hedge funds and how the industry was about to burn to the ground. This
was taken seriously by only a handful of professionals who actually worked
in the industry. The future of the hedge fund industry is actually bright dueto several short- and long-term factors.
The strongest argument for the strength of the hedge fund industry is the
constant innovation that occurs in this industry. Hedge funds are constantlyusing new trading techniques, incorporating new asset classes, including
additional equity markets in their scope, and taking on new ﬁnancing and
investing roles to expand their total market share. Most hedge funds onthe edge of innovation are small, hungry teams that are driven to succeed,
and they know that they will be rewarded handsomely for doing so. The
combination of relatively low barriers of entry and direct ﬁnancial rewardsare a formula for continued growth and natural positive evolution of the
industry as a whole.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the future of the hedge fund industry, please see
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Future
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Hedge funds have been growing rapidly over the past 20 years, and whiletheir growth is now slowing down, they are becoming more diverse and14 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
innovative in their investment strategies. As the industry evolves, service
providers are becoming more like business partners and are vital to the busi-ness success of hedge fund managers. In the future, hedge funds are likely
to develop even more investment terms, investor agreements, and perfor-
mance fee structures to further align the interests of the investor with the
hedge fund portfolio manager and principal.
Free Resource: The Free Hedge Fund E-Book, at HedgeFundsBook.com.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.What is a hedge fund?
a.A private investment partnership that typically includes the manager
of the portfolio receiving both a management and performance fee.
b.A private equity fund that also employs hedging tactics using equity
securities.
c.A private investment partnership that is 100 percent unregulated and
can use leverage to produce higher absolute returns for investors.
d.The roles of the speciﬁc board members.
2.Which of the following is not one of the top trends affecting the hedge
fund industry right now?
a.Investors are seeking to work with more institutional-quality fund
managers.
b.Raising capital is becoming more competitive, so utilizing resources
such as third-party marketers and investor databases is on the rise.
c.Most hedge fund managers are now outsourcing their portfolio man-
agement activities to leading mutual funds, who trade the actual
account in the hedge fund.
d.Fund administrators, prime brokerage ﬁrms, compliance ﬁrms, third
party marketers, and auditing ﬁrms are becoming increasingly im-
portant to the operations and effectiveness of a hedge fund business.
3.True or false: Due to the concentrated nature of hedge fund strategies,
it is likely that another large market swing could eliminate the industry
completely.
4.Hedge funds typically charge a percent management fee and
percent performance fee.
a.3.5, 15
b.2, 25
c.1, 15
d.2, 20
5.True or false: A high-water mark allows a hedge fund manager, under
certain circumstances, to restrict or completely cut off redemptions fromHedge Fund Fundamentals 15
the portfolio due to market illiquidity or speciﬁc sets of circumstances
set forth in the contract.
6.True or false: Hedge funds are the one type of investment that is com-
pletely unregulated, and that is why investment into this vehicle type is
restricted to institutional and accredited investors.
7.Most of the hedge fund industry is made up of managers who manage
between and in assets under management (AUM).
a.$1 million, $10 million
b.$100 million, $750 million
c.$1 million, $200 million
d.$50 million, $200 million
8.True or false: Financial journalist, author, and sociologist Andrew Lo
started the ﬁrst hedge fund in 1949 while working for Fortune .
9.A lock-up period is often put in place so that
a.A hedge fund may invest in various assets and will have more control
and ﬂexibility in the timing of its purchasing and selling of theseassets.
b.A hedge fund may lock up an investor into investing only in its fund
during a certain period of time, typically lasting 18 months to twoyears. This is put into place to protect the intellectual capital that
may be shared with other managers in the industry.
c.An investor can lock in his investment with the hedge fund and be
guaranteed additional capacity in the hedge fund for the next two to
three years after his initial investment. This is most commonly used
by institutional investors.
10. True or false: Due to being highly liquid vehicles, hedge funds are often
invested in for an average of six to nine weeks and offer liquidity on
a weekly basis. This is why the industry has been able to quickly gainassets for institutional investors of many types.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 2
Institutionalization
and Operations
The most important contribution management needs to make
in the twenty-ﬁrst century is to increase the productivity
of knowledge work and the knowledge worker.
—Peter F. Drucker
Astudy in 2006 by Capco shows that at least half of hedge fund failures
are due to operational reasons rather than performance reasons. This
runs contrary to what most would expect. To make matters more challeng-
ing, most fund managers come to the business with portfolio management
or trading experience, not operational fund management experience. This
chapter provides some operational best practices, tips, and recommenda-
tions from experts in the industry.
Why important : Everyone, including traders, service providers, mar-
keters, and portfolio managers, contributes to the institutional processes
and operations of a great hedge fund, and there are hundreds of tactics that
may be employed as a fund’s business grows. One thing is certain: If you are
looking to grow your hedge fund to over $100 million in assets, not knowing
how to improve the institutional quality of your hedge fund will result in
a loss of assets to those who do understand and adapt to the institutional
demands on hedge funds.
The hedge fund industry is becoming simultaneously more competitive
and diverse. A fund manager starting business today will face more hurdles
than any manager in the past in terms of regulations, objections, and gate-
keepers. One of the most difﬁcult ongoing challenges for managers from$1 million to $1 billion in assets under management (AUM) is the con-
stant need to increase the institutional quality of the hedge fund’s portfolio
17The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 18 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
management, operations, marketing, and risk management. At the same
time, most hedge fund managers have no mentor, mastermind group, orconsistent help in becoming more institutional in how they operate. This
chapter is meant to help ﬁll that void in the industry and provide some tan-
gible steps that managers can take to improve their processes and operations.
STEPHEN ABRAHAMS, VICE PRESIDENT OF
MARKETING FOR A LONDON-BASED HEDGE FUND
Our ﬁrst interview is with Stephen Abrahams, who has 20 years of ﬁnancial
advisory experience, from tied agent to index fund adviser (IFA) to offshore
IFA, and has most recently been raising capital for a boutique hedge fundmanager in London.
Richard Wilson: Stephen, from your experience in raising capital, what are
the ﬁve top things that you believe hedge fund managers can do to become
more institutional?
Stephen Abrahams: I believe that the top ﬁve things hedge funds managers
can do would be:
1.Understand their strengths and weaknesses—know what their unique
selling proposition (USP) really is.
2.Have better than average marketing materials and sale literature that
is constructed by someone who knows what investors are looking for.
3.Employ an in-house salesman or hire a third-party marketer, or both.
The managers can then concentrate on what they are good at by trading
and managing the portfolio.
4.Take the long-term view and invest long-term; institutions take their
time to make decisions.
5.Listen closely to objections, investor feedback, and clues to institu-
tional checkboxes such as liquidity, size, transparency, and so on.
Richard Wilson: Great. That sounds like good advice. Many of the hedge
fund managers I speak with are still trying to raise capital without any
dedicated resource reaching out to new potential investors on a daily ba-sis, and I always believe that is a mistake. It takes a concerted effort to
grow assets in this competitive environment, and as you’ve suggested, this
process can also help improve fund operations and positioning as an insti-tutional quality fund. Many investors want to become more institutional
to attract more capital to their funds. Is there any magic bullet that you
have found to attract capital while you still have a small AUM?Institutionalization and Operations 19
Stephen Abrahams: Deﬁnitely not a magic bullet, as institutions have a tick-
box mentality (very detailed, step-by-step checklist-type due diligence)and size does matter. You really need to have a set of contacts that look
to invest in smaller funds to get you to that magic $100 million, which
isn’t easy and it takes a long time and a lot of hard work to accomplish.
Richard Wilson: I also liked two things you mentioned there, that there is
no magic bullet, and “that magic $100 million” mark. I agree that there is
no magic bullet in becoming more institutional or raising capital. It reallydoes take day-after-day hard work and consistent, tenacious relationship
development and adjustment of your marketing strategy. Also, while some
research organizations might deﬁne emerging hedge funds as any fundswith less than $250 million in AUM, in the real world 80 percent of the
industry would consider a fund with over $100 million in AUM as coming
out of the emerging manager zone.
I once had the fun job of calling every single institutional consulting ﬁrm
in the United States—over 200 of them. At that time I was raising capital
for a $600 million fund of hedge funds and a $10 million long/short fund.What I found was that over 95 percent of these consultants who represent
large institutional investors require that you have $100 million or more in
assets before they will seriously consider recommending you to their clients.In other words, they may complete some due diligence on you as an exercise
or in anticipation that you may grow to over $100 million in size, but you
won’t get any real asset-growing traction with most of them until you get to
that magic $100 million mark, as Stephen put it.
BOB PARDO, CEO AND PRESIDENT, PARDO
CAPITAL LIMITED
Our next interview is with Bob Pardo of Pardo Capital Limited. Mr. Pardo
has been a commodity trading adviser since 1996 and has worked with
a wide variety of strategies, both short- and longer-term. Pardo Capital
has an 11-year track record and has managed up to $50 million duringoperations, and they have picked up a lot of best practices along the way.
Their investment strategies are based on their proprietary Walk-Forward
Analysis methodology as described in Mr. Pardo’s book, The Evaluation
and Optimization of Trading Strategies (John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
Richard Wilson: What have you learned not to do, or what have you stopped
doing related to trading or operations that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position20 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
as a high-quality fund management business? Any lessons or tips to share
on this point?
Bob Pardo: I would not say that we have stopped doing anything. I would
say that we have reprioritized our research and development process to
get viable products out there when they are in a form that is of interest to
our investment space.
Richard Wilson: Besides AUM, what do you believe is most important for
a hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institution-alizing a hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research?
Pedigree?
Bob Pardo: It depends where the hedge fund is to start. They are all im-
portant. However, if you do not have a viable and competitive product,
of course, you do not have a business. Assuming that, I would then rank
pedigree, research, and infrastructure.
Richard Wilson: I agree, lots of times when professionals ask how they can
raise $30 million for their hedge fund, the most honest response is “Itdepends.” How has your ﬁrm gotten past the “under $100 million, no
institutional quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smaller
investors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?Any lessons learned here?
Bob Pardo: The only real lesson to be learned here is the realization
that with less than $100 million AUM, there are a lot of institutions
of all types who will not be able to deal with you for a whole range of
reasons. The ﬂip side, then, is to identify and focus on those who will.
Of course, there is the occasional opportunity to attract a $100 millioninvestor and then just go on to the next stage of development.
Richard Wilson: What operational resources does your ﬁrm leverage or use
to help outsource work or improve the efﬁciency of the work your fundfaces to keep business moving forward each month?
Bob Pardo: We outsource a lot and it has its pros and cons. It is ideal for
a small operation. At a certain size, however, a lot of outsourcing stops
making sense. That being said, given the maturing of the entire space,
outsourcing can often be done quite cost effectively.
Richard Wilson: I agree, every hedge fund I have ever worked with out-
sourced many functions. It almost never makes sense to do everything
yourself, and on some level you simply can’t while still offering a greatproduct to your clients. Do your ﬁrm’s marketers undergo formal capital
raising or marketing training?
Bob Pardo: At this point, no. At the higher levels, we are interested in
attracting proven talent. We feel that we can bring a lot to the table with
our various types of expertise. At the level of newer talent, we prefer to
groom in-house. In the end, after our intellectual property, our people areInstitutionalization and Operations 21
our number one resource. They represent stability and the potential for
future growth
Richard Wilson: That will be refreshing for some young professionals to
hear, who want to get into the industry. Many professionals who contact
us regarding the CHP Designation have the view that if they didn’t com-
plete two or three hedge fund internships and obtain some sort of entry
level hedge fund position in the past, there is not a whole lot of hope for
them in the industry. I disagree, as there are many ﬁrms like yours whowould like to train someone from the ground up.
Do you recommend that hedge fund start-ups begin raising capital from
day 1, or are you in the camp that believes that a two- to four-year trackrecord should be developed ﬁrst?
Bob Pardo: Hit the ground running. We made the mistake of waiting, and
aside from costing us a fortune in lost revenues, it hurt us in other ways as
well. The industry has changed dramatically over the past several years.
A two- to four-year track record is no longer a necessity in many cases.Pedigree and the proverbial “good story” carry a lot more weight these
days.
Richard Wilson: I agree. There are two main reasons why I think it is never
too early to begin marketing. First, a lot of business is done based on trust
and relationships, so the earlier you start the stronger your relationships
get. Second, by starting your marketing early, you move up the learning
curve on what investors expect, what marketing materials need to be in
place, and what resources may need to be dedicated to this type of work.
What is the critical issue that decides whether you work with a par-
ticular consultant, service provider, or marketer? What is the one thing
that you always look for? Good service? Recommendations from others?
Branding? Experience?
Bob Pardo: Experience and credibility and the ability for the service provider
to demonstrate a track record, preferably, or a workable plan to provide
the exact service that we need.
VINOD PAUL, MANAGING DIRECTOR
OF SERVICE AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT,
EZE CASTLE INTEGRATION
Our next interview is with Vinod Paul, managing director of service and
business development at Eze Castle Integration, a leading and well-respectedconsulting and technology solutions ﬁrm which services hedge fund and in-
vestment ﬁrms. Leading a talented team of customer service and engineering
professionals, Vinod Paul oversees all customer-facing engagements for Eze22 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Castle Integration. Vinod joined the company in 2002, and his responsibili-
ties include service delivery and business development for the ﬁrm.
Richard Wilson: Vinod, what are some of the institutionalization and op-
erational improvement trends that you are seeing with your hedge fundclients?
Vinod Paul: What I see is that they are reinvesting their tools. These start out
as nice-to-haves and then turn into must-haves. An example of this is ordermanagement systems. Smaller ﬁrms with just one or two prime brokers
do this in Excel, but as they grow past the $100 million they typically
bring on prime broker numbers three, four, and ﬁve, and they need anorder management system that ﬁts their needs better. Other tools that
were nice-to-haves and now are need-to-haves are customer relationship
management (CRM) tools—they need this to manage investor reporting.
Richard Wilson: I have found that SalesForce.com is the most popular CRM
tool for hedge funds today. What have you seen?
Vinod Paul: We see a variety and offer our own CRM solution. This is
because we have about 650 hedge funds within our umbrella, and the
issue with SalesForce.com is that it is very vanilla. It was not created forhedge funds and investment ﬁrms exclusively.
Richard Wilson: Are hedge funds missing the boat on operational best prac-
tices? Any advice?
Vinod Paul: The dynamics are changing. Hedge funds used to launch with
little organization, wearing a lot of hats. In the past, compliance used to
be half-done or outsourced, and this tool is very deﬁned. Now there aremultiple tools and guides and experts on what you should be doing each
month and who should be doing it. There are now outsourcing services
for this area, and this is a growing importance, so we are seeing a lot ofﬁrms invest up front in that now.
Richard Wilson: You work with literally hundreds of hedge funds who are
always reinvesting in their infrastructure and operations. Any low-hanging
fruit in terms of institutionalization? Low-cost actions?
Vinod Paul: Yes, here is one that is very low cost—this is something we
don’t see many funds doing: Large hedge funds do business continuity
planning. Lots of new hedge funds are asked about disaster recovery,
but many hedge funds ignore this. You have someone go in and look atprocesses going on within the ﬁrm: Who is doing what, how does your
team work together from different locations, how will you operate? This
is a very low-cost solution, and many ﬁrms should be doing this. Thisonly costs a few hundred dollars to implement and have in place each
month. The large funds understand the importance of business continuity
planning as it ties to disaster recovery. Most funds should be doing this.Institutionalization and Operations 23
Richard Wilson: Great piece of advice. That sounds like one more puzzle
piece that hedge fund managers can clue into within this book in terms ofﬁguring out the 20 to 30 things they are not doing but could be to become
a more institutional-quality organization.
You work with so many diverse clients—this may be challenging, but
what is the most common bottleneck for further growth of individual
hedge funds?
Vinod Paul: The biggest challenge is that nobody wants to be the ﬁrst one in.
Every investor wants to go in with others. One person had ﬁve investors
come in at one time so that nobody was the ﬁrst group to put their toe in
the water. I thought that was a unique approach that I don’t see very often.
Richard Wilson: What do you see in terms of growing a track record before
marketing a hedge fund? Are professionals building up three- to four-year
track records ﬁrst, or marketing their funds right out of the gates with
perhaps immature operations in place?
Vinod Paul: A track record is of huge importance. Most small funds are
now starting much smaller than they wanted to. Lots of them are working
within the fund, trading for six months or a year before dedicating a full
team to raising capital, because investors sometimes like to see people whocan be successful on their own. They want to know the business is sound
and not based on raising a large amount of short-term money. I think the
money and talent are both out there but people are being very cautious,
wanting at least six months of proof. The investor wants to make sure the
manager has something at stake as well in the hedge fund business.
Richard Wilson: Have you seen any uptick in action within the hedge fund
start-up space? Our team has seen dozens of managers moving from in-
vestment banks and trading roles into launching their own hedge fund
business.
Vinod Paul: Yes, in the past three months, tremendous uptick in individuals
starting a hedge fund. Many professionals are leaving large organizations
and are making investments and taking that risk now. A lot of individuals
are taking this risk.
Richard Wilson: What would you suggest are the top three types of tools
that are most powerful or useful for hedge fund managers to use in their
business?
Vinod: Most hedge fund managers are not educated on the full array of
tools available to them today. If they need something, chances are the
tools are out there and they are affordable. A few years ago infrastructure
used to cost $200,000 when investors wanted sound disaster recovery,compliance, and infrastructure on a very high level. For example, we have
an enterprise-level infrastructure. We can split that up and offer even just
two to three people a technology platform that has compliance, disaster24 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
recovery, and business continuity all tied in. This is common now, to
have the tools of a 1,000-person shop but only spend hundreds per userper month, not $200,000 on day one. This is now available from many
vendors throughout the industry, and hedge fund managers should take
advantage of this as they grow in order to get more done with fewer
dollars. The top three tools I would suggest relate to:
1.Sound infrastructure setup—real corporate e-mail, real BlackBerry
technology, ﬁle services, remote archiving, and so on.
2.Disaster recovery, so you can transfer with ease to another location in
case of something happening.
3.Compliance—covering e-mail, infrastructure management (IM), poli-
cies, procedures, tools in place to ensure you are compliant with allregulations.
Richard Wilson: What trends do you see within the $1 billion-plus hedge
fund space? What are they investing in?
Vinod Paul: Due to the size of their business they do not need every tool for
risk management from an outside vendor, but they are looking at the best
tools and being smart about their investments. They have larger teams so
they have more educated professionals, or they engage consultants to helpthem ﬁnd the better tools out there. A lot of these funds are being smarter
about what they are doing because they have most expertise in-house and
more choices in the marketplace.
Richard Wilson: Any last pieces of advice for hedge fund managers or pro-
fessionals in the industry?
Vinod Paul: I deal with a lot of start-ups and professionals who are starting
a hedge fund. I think the most successful guys are those who educate
themselves. They take the time to really check out what options are outthere right now, and don’t rely on rumors of how much things cost. There
is so much competition within the information technology (IT) space, and
this is a huge beneﬁt to hedge fund managers who now can pay much lessthan they may have just ﬁve to seven years ago. Every manager should
educate themselves, differentiate themselves in how their processes are
run and infrastructure is built.
NAKUL NAYYAR, QUANTITATIVE
TRADING/SUPPORT, QUAD CAPITAL
Also for this chapter and for Chapter 5 on starting a hedge fund, I inter-
viewed Nakul Nayyar from a U.S.-based hedge fund manager. He sharedhis experience on creating a more institutional-quality trading environment.Institutionalization and Operations 25
Richard Wilson: Could you please explain your professional background in
hedge funds and trading in general? Please also include the story of howyou got started in the industry, if you don’t mind.
Nakul Nayyar: I graduated in 2002 from Johns Hopkins University into
what was a difﬁcult job environment. My ﬁrst job out of school was
actually in manufacturing, working as a project manager for a Fortune
500 company. After a few years of executing projects all over the North-
east, I began seriously contemplating a career change. I was actively man-aging my own accounts at the time and had some successful ﬁrst attempts.
With more luck than skill, I’m sure, at that time, I decided to leap ﬁrst
into trading. I quit my job, packed a suitcase, and moved to New YorkCity. After a number of interviews—some quite unique, I should add—I
landed a trading assistant role at a proprietary trading ﬁrm. My role was
primarily to research and recommend growth/momentum stocks, using a
mixture of event-driven fundamentals and technical analysis. Addition-
ally, since I had an interest in derivatives, I managed the hedging of theoverall portfolio.
Using that experience as a springboard, and after another set of very
interesting interviews, I joined a small family ofﬁce hedge fund with a focuson systematic and algorithmic-driven trading. Being a small fund, the ﬁrm
had a start-up feel to it and an entrepreneurial spirit, meaning beyond
the unglamorous daily tasks of keeping a fund running, I was allowed
to research my own ideas and strategies and have these implemented.
And while many strategies were automated, there were a few strategies
that required manual execution or intervention. Additionally, as marketconditions or regimes changed, it was important to reﬁne, modify, or
scrap existing strategies. The experience of creating a strategy through
its life cycle (including sometimes its death) was extremely valuable andshaped my philosophy on trading immensely.
Richard Wilson: Thanks for sharing. It is interesting that you worked in
the family ofﬁce environment. I think that the experience of working
in a family ofﬁce is very valuable and often underestimated. I see such a
demand for professionals wanting to work in hedge funds after graduationor some investment banking experience, but hardly anyone asks about
getting into the family ofﬁce industry.
How can a hedge fund manager improve the institutional feel and efﬁ-
ciency of his trading environment? Do you have a few methods or exam-
ples of how this can be accomplished?
Nakul Nayyar: A professional web site with password access is relatively
inexpensive and can be done quickly. For start-ups especially, a web site
allows all interested parties to quickly ﬁnd your ﬁrm online and provides
a perception of professionalism. Try to provide real content on the siteand not some generic marketing talk to get interest. Spend some time on26 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
the bios as well; people are generally most interested in the background
of the managers.
Additionally, there are all kinds of software that can be incorporated
into your existing systems to crunch various statistics, generate reports,
and do a number of other very useful functions without a lot of additional
work. Talk to your brokers, prime brokers, and so on, and see what tools
they may have available for free to assist your business. Or, alternatively,
hiring programmers has become cheaper and cheaper.
Hire or learn quantitative measures and testing techniques even if the
strategy is completely discretionary. Not only can it yield positive results
for your trading, but it can be incorporated into your marketing docu-ments as well. Data-driven research and reporting, in my opinion, is being
valued much more highly than a keen eye or nicely annotated charts.
Richard Wilson: That is great advice—so many nuggets there I’m afraid that
some may be missed. I agree that a professional web site is important, and
I think that providing genuinely valuable content is even more effective. Ithelps build a relationship and position your fund principles or traders as
experts and authorities in the space. This goes a long way with investors
who want to make sure they are working with professionals who arenot green to the business. Also, if anyone out there is looking to hire
programmers, I have successfully hired and managed part-time contract
programmers through a web site called Elance.com. It is a great resource
that I have just started using for our ﬁrm.
Many other experts whom I interview in this book refer to carefully
selecting the right service providers. I think that if you select them appropri-ately, you will have a leg up on competition due to the pedigree large service
providers can lend you and the tools and reporting services they can also
provide. This is especially true while choosing a fund administration ﬁrmand prime broker. Dig into checklists of exactly what they can provide, and
make sure they actually follow through once everything is said and done.
HENDRIK KLEIN, CEO, DA VINCI INVEST LTD.
Our next interview related to fund operations and institutionalization iswith Hendrik Klein, CEO of Da Vinci Invest Ltd., a Zurich-based hedge
fund professional.
Richard Wilson: Hendrik, could you share a bit on your background and
fund so we know the perspective from which you are answering these
questions?Institutionalization and Operations 27
Hendrik Klein: I am CEO and founder of Da Vinci Invest. My specialization
is relative value/volatility arbitrage, but we dare to think out of the box. Soour strategy could be described as global macro (I look at the global mar-
kets with a macro-like approach) or commodity trading adviser (CTA).
This is because we trade listed options and futures mainly. Our current
fund size is $45 million, but we managed already over $300 million in
total in this strategy.
Richard Wilson: Great, it is good to have some insights here from a
European-based hedge fund manager running this type of a strategy.
What operational resources does your ﬁrm leverage or use to help out-
source work or improve the efﬁciency of the work your fund faces to keepbusiness moving forward each month?
Hendrik Klein: Da Vinci Invest is domiciled in a so-called hedge fund hotel .
Richard Wilson: Hedge fund hotels have a mixed reputation here in the
United States, and I know some managers are interested in just ﬁguring
out what services they provide to emerging fund managers. What servicesdoes the hedge fund hotel provide for you right now?
Hendrik Klein: They provide us with bookkeeping, tax advice, and IT main-
tenance. Software development is outsourced to IFIT and other outsidecompanies.
Richard Wilson: How important do you see service providers being to the
success of your fund? What process have you used to select these ser-
vice providers, and what lessons have you learned about working with
both the large and small service providers that your ﬁrm has worked
with?
Hendrik Klein: We underestimated the service providers’ part in the past. It is
very important to have a good administrator, who delivers net asset value
(NAV) in time and accurately. Additional services like sales fee calculationwould be perfect. In the beginning we had an administrator who delivered
NAV six to eight weeks too late. Our auditors never managed to ﬁnish
the audit in the ﬁrst or second quarter.
Richard Wilson: That certainly doesn’t make things any easier while trying
to grow your business. What was the result of that lack of service?
Hendrik Klein: One family ofﬁce did not invest because of that. We lost a
lot of reputation or credibility because of that.
Richard Wilson: That is a good case study, a story that will help managers
pay attention and not underestimate the power of having solid service
provider relationships and processes in place. So many times I stress the
importance of working with solid service providers, but sometimes it takesa story like this to drive the point home.
What is the critical issue that decides whether you work with a par-
ticular consultant, service provider, or marketer? What is the one thing28 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
that you always look for? Good service? Recommendations from others?
Branding? Experience?
Hendrik Klein: He should have time for us. That is, not having too many
clients at the same time. The marketing should be done in good and in
bad times.
Richard Wilson: What are the top three resources or tools that you use to
run your hedge fund that are worth more than anything else? What are
the most valuable resources that you could recommend to others?
Hendrik Klein: We use Bloomberg, Sol-3, and IFIT risk software with stress
test scenarios. We can recommend all of these to hedge fund managers.
In marketing we use Salesforce, but we are thinking about switching toEmnis soon.
Richard Wilson. I have come to ﬁnd that Salesforce is the leading CRM
system for fund managers—it helped me raise capital as well. What is the
most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-month operations?
How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What tools have you foundthat help you manage this?
Hendrik Klein: Positive performance every month end. A strict risk manage-
ment helps.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other pieces of advice related to opera-
tional hedge fund best practices that you could share with other managers
in the industry?
Hendrik Klein: Separate operational power between portfolio management
and risk management.
Richard Wilson: What are your top ﬁve tips for hedge fund managers who
have less than $100 million in assets under management but would like
to improve the institutional quality of their fund?
Hendrik Klein: I actually have several suggestions for hedge fund managers
who want to increase their institutional operations and trading:
/squaresolidLaunch a UCITS III fund, if possible with your strategy.
/squaresolidList your fund on a stock exchange.
/squaresolidSelect the best service providers.
/squaresolidGet due diligence reports.
/squaresolidGet awards.
Richard Wilson: Great, thank you for that advice. What have you learned
not to do, or what have you stopped doing related to trading or operations
that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position as a high-quality fund managementbusiness? Any lessons or tips to share on this point?
Hendrik Klein: I would have to say not selling straddles. We do not take
unlimited risks anymore.Institutionalization and Operations 29
Richard Wilson: Besides AUM, what do you believe is most important for a
hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institutionalizinga hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
Hendrik Klein: I believe that transparency, risk management, and clarity of
investment process are the most important things. Anything you can do
to upgrade the pedigree of the team helps.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on institutionalization and the importance of trans-
parency for hedge fund managers, please type this URL into your Webbrowser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Transparency
Richard Wilson: I completely agree. One of the top three reasons this book
was put together is that I believe hedge fund managers would like to hear
from others on what has helped raise capital, make them more institu-
tional, and improve operations. I think that some hedge fund managers or
traders can feel somewhat alone in the industry and in their plans or chal-lenges. Yet nowadays almost everyone I speak with is trying to upgrade
their team pedigree and the caliber of their operations. This is one of the
most widespread trends in the industry right now—the institutionalizationof trading, risk management, marketing, team pedigree, and investment
processes regardless of assets under management.
SHERI KANESAKA, ASSOCIATE, MICHELMAN
& ROBINSON, LLP
The next interview on institutionalization was with Sheri Kanesaka of
Michelman & Robinson, LLP, a law ﬁrm serving hedge fund managers and
alternative investment professionals. She regularly handles complex, cross-border transactions and counsels on regulatory issues and compliance with
U.S. securities laws and regulations for both private and public offerings.
Richard Wilson: In terms of making a hedge fund more institutional, what
operational changes are you seeing being made?
Sheri Kanesaka: Probably one of the biggest trends right now, prompted
in large part by the Madoff scandal and Ponzi schemes, is to have an30 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
external party do the fund administration such as the month-end investor
reports/letters, analysis on positions, and so on. Prior to this trend, mostof the hedge funds internally did the fund administration and provided
the month-end reports. Now, however, investors want a third party to
provide some oversight by reporting on the funds’ books and records to
make sure that investor monies are being invested in securities, derivatives,
and so on. Most common is a monthly analysis and report.
Richard Wilson: I have seen the same trend. I have even spoken to board
members of hedge funds who are now requiring their funds to use external
administration ﬁrms or they will withdraw their board membership. I
don’t see this trend slowing down anytime soon.
Your ﬁrm works with many large hedge fund managers and asset man-
agement clients. Where do you see many of these ﬁrms investing their
money back into? What could smaller funds learn from this?
Sheri Kanesaka: It is harder in this downturn (2008–2009) to access talent on
all levels; harder to ﬁnd them and retain them as management fees decline.Funds have to be creative in attracting, retaining, and compensating talent
in this more challenging environment.
ERIC WARSHAL, CEO, FUND ASSOCIATES
The next interview was completed with Eric Warshal, CEO of Fund Asso-
ciates, a fund administration ﬁrm based in Atlanta, Georgia. Mr. Warshal
is a seasoned executive manager with over 15 years of operational man-
agement experience. Mr. Warshal spent 12 years with Cox Enterprises(a Fortune 200 company). He held various management positions in the
company, ending his tenure as the director of operational support. Over the
years he held positions of increasing responsibility that included productmanagement, business development, research and development, technology
management, and general operational management and support. His last
position entailed managing the technology support of the 35,000 employeesof Manheim Auctions (a Cox subsidiary). Mr. Warshal holds a bachelor of
science in marketing from the University of Florida and a master of business
administration from Emory’s Goizueta Business School.
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you now see hedge
funds picking up that are a new trend in the industry?
Eric Warshal: Although not entirely a new best practice, as a result of
the scandals that have permeated the news recently, we have noticed
an increase in the demand for cash management services that entail the
administrator acting as a signatory for wire transfers on behalf of the fund.Institutionalization and Operations 31
This is directly reﬂective of the need to provide current and prospective
investors with a level of conﬁdence that the proper checks and balancesare in place which prevent the opportunity for fraudulent activities to
occur. Overall, we have identiﬁed more previously self-administered funds
engaging in the best practice of hiring administrators to provide their
investors and prospective investors with the conﬁdence that an objective
third party is validating their returns.
Richard Wilson: I’m glad you brought up the wire transfer and validation of
returns points, because despite the common recommendation for hedge
fund managers to obtain administration ﬁrm services, the direct reasons
or beneﬁts of doing so are sometimes not stressed enough. Anything elseyou see, any trends related to this advice?
Eric Warshal: We don’t recommend particular investments; however, we
are able to identify trends that occur in the trading of our clients. We
notice that funds that properly utilize leverage seem to grow quicker than
those that don’t. However, it seems to be quite essential that, irrespectiveof what trading strategy they are implementing, they incorporate a hedge
so as to offset their risk. We’ve seen funds that have grown quickly, by
taking a large amount of risk, and we’ve seen them fall just as quickly.
Richard Wilson: I have seen similar things happen to very risky portfolios.
I’ve worked closely on the third-party marketing and capital introduc-
tion/prime brokerage side of the business, and I often see both types of
ﬁrms deny clients service if they are betting more than they are investing.
Nobody wants to be associated with a manager aiming at 30 percent a
month returns.
Everyone talks about the importance of operations, but from your per-
spective where should hedge fund managers be reinvesting their money to
improve their operations?
Eric Warshal: Fund managers are realizing that there are both operational
efﬁciencies and cost efﬁciencies associated with analyzing which opera-
tions can and should be accommodated for in-house and which should be
outsourced. Fund managers can take advantage of consulting ﬁrms who
can fully assess the manager’s operational business and provide quan-tiﬁable justiﬁcation for potential outsourcing of certain operations, such
as technology, back-end ofﬁce management, administration, and so on.
Additionally there exists the added beneﬁt of potentially becoming moreappealing to institutional investors by virtue of properly outsourcing cer-
tain operations—to provide them with the level of comfort, knowing that
certain operations are being handled by experienced professionals.
Richard Wilson: I think that documenting each key process your ﬁrm under-
takes and making sure you have solid reasons for keeping each individual
process in-house is an exercise every fund should walk through. What32 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
operational best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds imple-
menting that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Eric Warshal: Proper due diligence is something that most small hedge funds
tend to bypass, be it because of cost or just the fact that the fund doesn’t
have the overall time/resources to devote to it. However, the $1 billion-
plus hedge funds take their time when deciding where and when to in-
vest, with respect to other fund managers. By engaging in proper due
diligence—that is, assessing the manager, his background, his past perfor-mance, his operations, and so on—they are able to more conﬁdently invest
and decrease their risk factors. However, smaller, less resource-intensive
funds that solely rely upon the experience and intuition of their managersoftentimes only provide cursory levels of due diligence when making some
fund investment decisions.
Richard Wilson: This is a topic that I touch on in detail in Chapter 6.
I interview a family ofﬁce, an institutional consultant, and provide some
tips to managers who are moving through due diligence processes. I believemost professionals now recognize the importance of due diligence, but
allocating the capital and ﬁnding the time will always be the bottleneck
in the industry to actually implementing these best practices.
LANCE BARAKER AND WILLIAM KATTS, SENIOR
MANAGING DIRECTORS, TRADESTATION PRIME
The ﬁnal short interview for this chapter on institutionalization and oper-
ations improvement was with Lance Baraker and William Katts. As seniormanaging directors at TradeStation Prime, they meet and work with more
than 500 hedge fund managers each year. Their experience is in working
with $300 million to $1 billion-plus hedge funds as well as emerging hedgefund managers and start-ups.
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you now see hedge
funds picking up that are a new trend in the industry?
Lance Baraker: There are several areas that a hedge fund needs to set up for
operational best practices.
/squaresolidSince the debacle of 2008 in the ﬁnancial industry, risk managementhas come to the forefront of operational best practices. Hedge fundmanagers cannot access risk in a T +1 format any more.
/squaresolidManagers need to understand the risk proﬁle of their fund and determine
the leverage, liquidity, and market risk. Managers should be offeringInstitutionalization and Operations 33
their institutional investors risk reports on demand and set up at least a
weekly report going through the key risk metrics.
/squaresolidHedge fund managers should also segregate the duties of risk out to
more than one person in their ﬁrm. That way the person picking the
stocks is not the one determining the risk of the fund.
/squaresolidOther key areas in operational best practices include valuation, compli-
ance, disclosure, and business structure.
William Katts: I agree, but I would also like to stress that hedge funds must
have the ability to consolidate multiple asset classes, multiple currencies,
and multiple prime brokers in a single integrated platform in real time.
Portfolio managers must, with a click of the mouse, be able to knowexactly what their real time proﬁt and loss (P&L), risk, and positions are.
This trend is also to have a real-time reporting system that can be accessed
by investors or a third party, moving toward a fully transparent model.The key trend in this market is full transparency.
Richard Wilson: Great advice. Out of the points you mentioned, I believe the
segregation of risk and portfolio management duties is probably the least
common suggestion I have seen actually implemented. This is something
that I believe many $30 million-plus hedge funds could achieve buthaven’t yet.
Everyone talks about the importance of operations, but from your per-
spective, where should hedge fund managers be reinvesting their moneyto improve their operations?
Lance Baraker: Since the Bernie Madoff debacle, transparency is the
buzzword going around the hedge fund industry. Hedge fund managersneed capital to sustain their business, and this capital comes from institu-
tional investors.
/squaresolidThe hedge fund managers who understand their demands will be the
most successful.
/squaresolidRight now daily or weekly transparency is essential.
/squaresolidI would reinvest capital in technology that could produce daily reports.
/squaresolidIn addition, I would either hire a compliance ofﬁcer or outsource this
service to groups in the industry. Managers must have a written com-
pliance manual and have a clear process in place for handling conﬂicts
of interest in the hedge fund.
/squaresolidI would also suggest the manager do a monthly call with investors to
discuss the performance of the fund and thoughts on the strategy.
/squaresolidQualitative discussions are just as important as the quantitative reports.
Richard Wilson: I and several of the hedge fund managers and consultants I
have interviewed strongly agree. You really need to understand your end34 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
client, their concerns, needs, wishes, and constraints, to operate in a way
which is congruent with who they would like to invest in.
If you are a hedge fund manager or trader looking to start a fund, I would
take some notes down on the bullet points listed by Lance Baraker and startcreating a to-do list for your fund. Start with what can be implemented this
week and make sure that it is done in a way that ensures the new processes
or controls will be carried out consistently each week or month.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds
implementing that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Lance Baraker: I don’t think smaller hedge funds are ignoring any best
practices. However, I think the larger hedge funds have the capital tospend on compliance ofﬁcers, risk managers, and technology. Most of the
smaller hedge funds are usually one- or two-man shops that wear many
hats and have money from family and friends. I think the service providerindustry for hedge funds has grown, and you can outsource a tremendous
amount of this to experts in their ﬁeld. You can outsource compliance,
disaster recovery, IT, valuation reporting, and middle- and back-ofﬁce
functions. This would save the smaller hedge fund time and money and
still fulﬁll the best practices methodology it needs to be successful.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on institutional quality improvement opportuni-ties for hedge funds, please type this URL into your Web browser:
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Institutional
Richard Wilson: True. Larger hedge funds can have 10 or 100 times the bud-
get of an emerging hedge fund manager. I think outsourcing your noncore
activities is the right way to go. I recently spoke with a fund manager inBoston at one of our Hedge Fund Premium networking events about this
issue, and he mentioned that they had identiﬁed 18 core processes being
carried out to run their fund. They have decided to outsource 15 of these.
Most funds I know don’t document every process they are carrying out
and do not cleanly outsource them in this type of a strategic fashion. If
you do it right it could have a few layers worth of beneﬁts to investorswho may be interested in examining your operations and what you do or
do not keep in-house.Institutionalization and Operations 35
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on documenting operational hedge fund pro-
cesses, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Operational
William, you have seen hundreds of hedge funds a year now and have
also been a trader for over 20 years. How do you see larger funds operating
in more institutional quality structures and how can small to medium-size
funds beneﬁt from your perspective?
William Katts: Like Lance, I believe that it is not so much that smaller funds
are not aware of what best practices they should be employing. It justcomes down to economics and the amount of actual business they have
to spread to the street.
Two points that do really leap out, though, are (1) the ability to integrate
transparent real-time risk systems and reporting, and (2) the implemen-
tation of true multi-prime functionality. The price to incorporate the risk
systems and reporting can be quite costly versus the expected returns ofthese smaller funds, and to multi-prime gives the larger funds the ability
to move assets between primes and extract more favorable fees than the
smaller funds. This also gives the allocators that feeling of safety across
custodians. We are growing our current business on the fact that many
small to medium-size hedge funds just haven’t historically had the amount
of business to support these two abilities, yet many managers know thatthey are critical to raising capital.
Richard Wilson: What should very quickly growing hedge funds of $100 mil-
lion invest their money in as they grow? What is most important?
William Katts: This may be oversimpliﬁed, but what is most important to a
hedge fund as they grow is investing in talent. This is extremely importantwhen implementing systems. Good systems are only as good as the ability
for them to be functional. The biggest complaint I hear from the bigger
hedge funds is that they are overstaffed with people who perform the samejob. Redundancy can escalate expenses. Also, the proper use of derivatives
can increase alpha and decrease risk. Having an experienced derivatives
trader is paramount—their ability to generate alpha and help a fundmanage risk is one of the key additions when the resources are available.
With the attrition of the trading ﬂoors and the advanced technology in
risk systems, the price for a talented person with proper risk tools becomes36 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
much more cost-effective and an absolute must as a fund walks up the
ladder.
Richard Wilson: Great, thank you both for sharing your insights. Few pro-
fessionals that we interview here work closely with so many different
hedge funds in the industry.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Within this chapter we heard from many professionals who collectively have
well over 100 years of experience within the industry. Here are some quick
tips directly from their transcripts:
/squaresolidTake the long-term view when planning out infrastructure andoperations.
/squaresolidUnderstand your USP; do SWOT analyses (strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats); have superior sales literature and a web
site in place.
/squaresolidInvest in talent and possibly a derivatives trader with risk management
experience.
/squaresolidMost funds are considered institutional when they have over $80 or
$100 million in AUM.
/squaresolidLeverage service providers to gain access to additional real-time report-ing, software, and risk management tools.
/squaresolidDon’t underestimate service providers—they are business partners who
can make or break your business.
/squaresolidCreate transparent processes, risk monitoring, compliance procedures,
and due diligence reports.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: A study by Capco in 2006 shows that more hedge funds
fail due to poor performance and portfolio blow-up than for operational
reasons.
2.Which of the following is not a piece of advice from Stephen Abrahams
on improving hedge fund operations and capital-raising processes?
a.Understand your strengths, weaknesses, and USP.
b.Have better than average marketing materials and sales literature.
c.Employ a third-party marketer or in-house sales professional.
d.Fire your service providers and bring all of your operational work
in-house to make sure everything is done the right way.Institutionalization and Operations 37
3.What AUM levels are typically considered the beginning of what a
mature or institutional-quality ﬁrm would manage?a.Over $25 million AUM.
b.Over $80 or $100 million AUM.
c.Over $250 million AUM.
d.Over $300 million AUM.
4.Hendrik Klein from Da Vinci Invest operates inside a hedge fund hotel.
Which services do hedge fund hotels typically provide?a.Bookkeeping, tax advice, ofﬁce space, IT maintenance.
b.Bookkeeping, tax advice, capital raising, portfolio managers.
c.Bookkeeping, portfolio management software, ofﬁce space, IT main-
tenance.
d.Bookkeeping, tax advice, capital raising, IT maintenance.
5.True or false: Working with the wrong service provider can result in
lost investors for a hedge fund.
6.True or false: Within this chapter we suggest keeping risk and portfolio
management together, as separating the operational powers of these
departments may lead to many problems for a hedge fund business.
7.Since the Madoff case it has become
popular for hedge funds
to use independent fund administration ﬁrms.
a.Less.
b.More.
8.Lance Baraker suggests that monitoring risk within a T +1 format is:
a.Now a best practice and should be available to all hedge fund
managers.
b.Now the industry standard and just now becoming available.
c.Not adequate anymore.
9.Within this chapter it is suggested that or transparency
helps ease investor concerns.
a.Monthly or annual.
b.Weekly or monthly.
c.Daily or weekly.
d.Weekly or quarterly.
10. True or false: William Katts suggests that talent is an overrated resource
that small hedge funds spend too much money on.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 3
Hedge Fund Marketing Pro
There are three ways to raise capital: having more high net worth
friends than the next fund manager, landing early institutional
allocations, or hard work. Get to work.
This chapter provides some basic capital raising and marketing tips, as well
as a case study analysis of Tassini Capital Management, a California-
based hedge fund manager. Tassini Capital Management was attempting to
grow its assets from $39.2 million in assets under management (AUM) to
$250 million in AUM in a three-year period. The case study outlines the
management’s struggles, challenges, lessons learned, and the formula they
found for raising capital from new investors. This chapter provides some
short interviews on capital raising, as well.
Why important : The capital-raising tips, strategies, and case study in-
cluded in this chapter are only available due to lessons learned the hard way,through making mistakes, receiving feedback, and adjusting capital-raising
strategies until they worked. Studying this chapter carefully can save liter-
ally $25,000 or more in consulting fees and, more importantly, double the
rate at which you raise capital. If these lessons and tips are ignored, your
team will likely repeat mistakes that others often make while trying to grow
their AUM.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund marketing, please type this URL intoyour Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Marketing
39The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 40 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BAD NEWS
The bad news is there is no magic bullet to raising capital. I spoke with
at least a dozen managers recently at a Hedge Fund Premium networking
event in Chicago regarding their capital-raising plans. Most were looking
for capital-raising help of some type, and we discussed many roadblocks
that managers are seeing between them and the AUM levels they are trying
to achieve.
Daily action and discipline are the best things that fund managers can do
to raise capital. They must take responsibility for marketing their fund and
have someone reaching out to new investors on a daily basis. If they do not,
they will forever remain in the bottom 20 percent of the industry in termsof assets. Very few funds gain their initial assets through a superpowerful
third-party marketing ﬁrms. Third-party marketers typically like to work
with managers who have some AUM momentum or foundation underneath
them.
To raise capital, managers need to have superior tools and processes to
those of their competitors. This means superior investor cultivation processes
in place, superior investor relationships management, superior marketing
materials, superior outreach efforts, superior e-mail marketing, and superiorfocus on investors who actually have the potential of making an investment.
Each of those topics could be discussed for a whole conference, and all of
these moving parts need to be in place to compete in today’s industry. Whilethis does not mean that managers need to outspend others in marketing,
they do need to strategically plan their marketing campaigns to compete
effectively.
There is a good quote which goes something like, “If you want to
have what others don’t, you have to do what others won’t.” In other
words, translated for hedge fund marketing: If you want to grow assets,you must put in the extra work, planning, and strategy that others skip
over.
Every morning, try to listen to a 45-minute custom MP3 audio ses-
sion of business lessons, marketing tips, and positive thinking notes. One
great quote I hear every morning is connected to an interview Brian Tracyconducts in which a multimillionaire says that success is easy: “You must
decide exactly what it is you want, and then pay the price to get to that
point.”All of this may sound wishy-washy or inexact, but it is importantto realize that there is no single magic bullet for raising capital. It takes
hard work, trial, and a superior effort on all fronts to stand out from your
competition.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 41
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on third-party marketing please type this URL into
your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/3PM
PUBLIC RELATIONS MANAGEMENT
Public relations has to be one of the most ignored marketing tools of hedgefund managers today. The Hedge Fund Group has worked with over three
dozen hedge funds on their marketing plans and capital-raising efforts. So
far, the most intense public relations effort our ﬁrm has seen set forth by asub–$1 billion hedge fund was a single press release over a four-year period.
This is not to say that any hedge fund that is not publishing at least four
press releases per year is doing something wrong. However, many could
beneﬁt by simply making themselves more available to the press.
The media is hungry for real-time opinions of hedge fund managers,
traders, and marketers. They need comments on current market conditions,
trends in hiring and ﬁring of traders and portfolio managers, and what
prospects lie ahead for the industry as a whole.
Many hedge fund managers shy away from contributing to stories in the
press. I would strongly encourage you to speak with your legal counsel and
see if they would approve of your discussions with the media if you stick to
industry trends, general market trends, and long-term movements you are
seeing in the industry.
Top Four Tips for Taking Advantage of Public Relations for Your Hedge
Fund
1.Speak to your legal counsel to check on exactly what you can or cannot
say to the press.
2.Develop a list of 10 to 15 targeted publications that you would like to
appear in. Identify the editors of ﬁnancial columns in those publicationsor news sources and introduce yourself to them as a resource.
3.Speak at public events, conferences, networking events, and other places
in the industry where you will be heard not only by others in the industry
but probably by a few members of the press as well.
4.Consider writing a book on your insights and experience. Many profes-
sionals in the hedge fund industry are often interviewed on TV after they42 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
have published a book on a speciﬁc topic in the hedge fund industry,
such as regulation or quantitative trading. Yes, writing a book soundsextreme to many who are already working 50 hours a week, but that is
also why it would be so effective to consider doing so. Those with the
time and skills to write well are often not the same ones who have the
experience and insight to write something unique and valuable.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on public relations strategies for hedge funds, pleasetype this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/PR
EDUCATIONAL MARKETING
One of the most effective ways you can market your hedge fund is by beingfour times more educational and easy to understand than your competition.
I wrote in my blog last year that a recent survey had shown that over 78 per-
cent of institutional investors will not invest in something that they cannotunderstand. I would imagine that for high net worth (HNW) investors this
ﬁgure is even higher.
While some managers purposely position their fund to appear “black
box” and top secret, there are opportunities to market hedge funds which are
open, transparent, and simple in explaining the fund’s investment process
and risk management tools. This does not mean ignoring advanced methodsor models of trading and managing portfolios, but it would require more
of a 10,000-foot-view and explanation of the investment process instead of
the 500-foot-views that are so often used. The trick in doing this right is to
balance providing enough detail and real meat that an institutional investor
or consultant will gain some granularity, while not completely overwhelmingHNW investors or wealth managers who may be less versed in common
hedge fund strategies of portfolio management techniques.
Here is a list of four additional ways you may market your hedge fund
in a more educational or simple way:
1.PowerPoint. Dedicate 20 percent of the PowerPoint presentation to
educational content. Asterisk all industry terms and note that deﬁnitions
are provided in the back of the presentation. Explain the investmentHedge Fund Marketing Pro 43
process so that anyone could understand, at least on a high level, how
your fund operates. Start with the team, high-level investment process,and how that all comes together before digging into trading examples
or risk management tools.
2.Folder. Many managers use a folder of marketing materials while meet-
ing with clients. This often includes a one pager, a PowerPoint presen-
tation, and a recent quarterly market outlook newsletter written by the
portfolio manager. It is wise to always include some additional readingin the folder as well. Provide two to three white papers written by ex-
perts outside of the ﬁrm that speak to the trends related to the assets
that your ﬁrm invests in or strategies your ﬁrm employs.
3.Speaking and writing. Speaking at wealth management conferences and
HNW-related events can be highly effective. The easily overlooked as-
pect here is audience: Are there more competitors or potential investors
at the events you speak at?
4.Wealth management and ﬁnancial planners. Some of the most ignored
sources of capital for hedge fund managers are small to medium-size
wealth management ﬁrms and ﬁnancial planning groups that serve
HNW professionals from time to time but don’t manage $1 billion-plusin total assets. Many of these groups work as part of a broker-dealer
network or RIA, and they may only meet in person with 5 to 10 hedge
funds in any one year, whereas larger institutions may meet with several
each week. These relationships take a long time to build into effective
sources of capital, but if they are approached in a more educational
fashion than your institutional leads, they can pay off as very stickylong-term accounts.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on educational marketing strategies for rais-ing capital, please type this URL Into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Educational
FORGET ABOUT CONTACTING MORE INVESTORS
Yes, it may seem illogical to forget about contacting new investors whileattempting to raise capital, but this may be what you need to do to meet
your business goals. Many of the hedge fund managers I speak to want to44 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
be connected with investors; they want lists of family ofﬁces, seed capital
providers, or HNW wealth management ﬁrms. While accessing more in-vestor contact details may be a useful resource and improve your marketing
efforts, it is often not the real constraint that is holding your business back.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on called “What Is a Family Ofﬁce?” please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Family-
Ofﬁce
No business is perfect; every business has some constraint that, if re-
moved, would help the business more than anything else. Sometimes this
constraint is portfolio management expertise, sometimes it is marketing ma-terials, and many times it is lack of institutionalized processes and tools.
Seldom do I meet with hedge funds which, if provided with a long list of
1,000 investors, would explode in assets under management.
Most hedge funds do not take the time to write down all of their current
business problems or symptoms and ask four “why” questions to identify
the root constraint in their business model. A good tool that I have seen usedby half a dozen management consulting gurus is the “Four Why Process.”
If you ask why something is happening four times, you will often get to the
root cause of the problem. Here’s an example of how the process is used:
/squaresolidInitial problem/symptom : We don’t manage $100 million in assets
yet. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : We are not raising capital
from wealth management ﬁrms as you had hoped. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : Our marketing materials have
not been brought up to speed with the competition’s—they are light andour investment process is poorly described. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer and follow-up question : We know that you should
be paying a consultant or in-house marketer to help with both mar-keting materials and generating relationships, but you have not hired
one. Why?
/squaresolidPotential answer : We do not have the proﬁts available to hire a full-time
marketer, but we can get around to creating a system to share equity,
grow relationships with third-party marketers, or build a marketing-
related advisory board.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 45
The point of this exercise is to identify what the bottleneck is that is
slowing down your growth. If a hedge fund can be seen as a 20-link chain,you must have all 20 strong links in place to keep the business growing
long-term. If 19 links can carry the weight of a $300 million fund but one
link is only up to par for a $10 million fund, then you will limit your growth
and may never reach or only very slowly grow into a $300 million fund. The
biggest return for your investment of time and money will be to focus on
ﬁxing that one broken or subpar link in your operations, marketing, trading,or internal business processes. Anything else would be a relative waste of
money or energy.
This is a unique marketing technique because it is a reminder that the
smartest thing you could do for your marketing and sales campaign may have
nothing to do with picking up a phone or buying a database of investors.
Before spending more money or valuable time, consider the following two
tips for improving your ability to attract investors:
1.Use the “Four Why Tool” to drill down deeper into the top ﬁve prob-
lems that you see your fund facing right now. Oftentimes three to ﬁve
problems will be symptoms of a single root cause which can be directly
addressed.
2.Ask others, including your advisory board, current investors, potential
investors and co-workers, what is holding your fund back. Do not set-
tle with two-word surface answers. Try to identify what three to ﬁveaction steps your fund could take this quarter to improve how you are
positioned and address the number one limiting factor in your business.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video called “What Is Holding Your Hedge FundBack?” please type this URL into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Holding
E-MAIL MARKETING BEST PRACTICES
I worked as a risk consultant and capital raiser for seven years before starting
my own ﬁrm. During the last few years of those positions, I was responsible
for raising most assets on an e-mail and phone-based system, and I have46 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
slowly picked up some tips for capital raising since then. Our business is so
e-mail-based (800,000 messages in two years) that we have been forced tostudy best practices in this space to improve our efﬁciency at connecting with
potential clients. Here are the e-mail marketing strategies we have picked up
the hard way over the past few years.
Most CEOs don’t invest their time or put much importance on man-
aging e-mail communications. If you invest your time in increasing your
effectiveness at e-mail marketing you will have an edge over others.
E-Mail Marketing Best Practices
1.Understanding importance of copy . What is the difference between a
$1 bill and a $100 bill? The message on the paper. The message on your
e-mail, the message on your investor letters, the message on everything
you write makes the difference between its being worth $1,000 and
$100,000. I think that sales copy writing is consistently undervalued
and overlooked by business and investment professionals of all types.One of the best tips I can provide for e-mail marketing would be simply
not to overlook the power of a carefully constructed e-mail marketing
campaign or well-written piece of communication.
2.Use the professional’s ﬁrst name in the subject of e-mails to them .
Marketing Sherpa 2008 study showed this practice increased open rates
by 30 percent; using both the ﬁrst and last name increased open ratesby 22 percent.
3.Focus on the headline . The most important part of any piece of copy
is the headline. Oftentimes over e-mail the headline of the e-mail isa slight variation of the subject line, perhaps the subject line minus
the person’s ﬁrst name. Focus on ﬁtting a beneﬁt and then the chain re-
action of that beneﬁt into the headline if possible: “Double Your CapitalRaising Resources to Cultivate More Investors Each Day.” We have
found that putting the beneﬁt after your ﬁrm name is most effective.
Just be careful not to promise beneﬁts that are at odds with your com-
pliance department or the core of what you are really offering.
4.Focus on the start . Hook the reader in the ﬁrst paragraph. Make sure
the ﬁrst paragraph is no longer than two sentences and provides a very
concise summary as to what will be discussed in the following message.
If possible, try to ﬁt in both what the beneﬁts will be of hearing thisinformation and what the dangers are of not paying attention to it.
Psychological studies consistently show that professionals are almost
twice as likely to listen more closely and take action on informationrelated to a fear or some negative result than on some potential beneﬁt
or positive outcome. This does not mean you should scare clients into
working with you, but you should hook readers by using framing , whichHedge Fund Marketing Pro 47
mentions the positive results as well as the negative consequences of not
taking action. The recent use of e-mail browsers that let you preview theﬁrst 50 to 150 words of e-mail messages makes the start of your e-mail
even more important.
5.Use professional e-mail distribution services . Use a professional e-mail
distribution service such as AWeber. This costs $10/month or less to
start using. By using this service your e-mails will be delivered more
often, your campaigns will be more organized, and the service will morethan pay for itself through saving you valuable time. Make sure that
whatever service you use, you consider opt-in conﬁrmation and enable
an unsubscribe link at the bottom of each e-mail you send.
6.Automate relationship development . Use automated follow-up e-mails.
Write a series of 20 educational e-mails covering industry white pa-
pers, industry ﬁndings, commonly misunderstood terms, and informa-
tion about your fund. Once you have qualiﬁed an investor, ask for their
permission to opt into an e-mail list which will automatically send themthese professional papers once a month for the next 20 months. If you
deliver value in each of these 20 e-mails, your further inquiries will be
well received. We currently use Aweber to send out automated e-mailsto over 50,000 professionals each month.
7.Use stories . Whenever you are writing an e-mail or sales letter, try to
incorporate a story of some type. How was this product created? How
did your career and experience evolve and bring you to this point where
you have gained this knowledge? If you read the early part of this chapter
you will see that I have a short story about my own experience withe-mail marketing which led me to write this chapter. This helps create a
frame of reference for the reader and can be helpful in many cases.
8.Include a picture and signature . End your communication with a picture
of the professional on the team who is held out as the communicator or
leader. Make sure that a real scanned signature and professional picture
are included to help readers connect with your team.
Our team provides over 1,600 hedge funds a year with capital-raising
advice, resources, and products. Our team has helped raise hundreds of
millions of dollars in capital as well. Through these two sources of experiencewe see many of the same fund marketing mistakes made over and over again.
If you can avoid these mistakes, you will be more effective than 80 percent
of your competitors in the marketplace.
Top 10 Fund Marketing Mistakes
1.You have a three-month capital raising goal. This is unrealistic and the
wrong mind-set to go out of the gate with. You need to plan, build48 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
relationships, educate potential clients, and design high-quality market-
ing strategies and materials for the long term. It takes time to raise lotsof capital, and usually the more valuable the investor, the longer the
sales cycle. Don’t try to cram everything into a one- to three-month
capital raise.
2.You’re counting on simply building a track record and then hoping to
outsource all marketing to a great third-party marketing ﬁrm down the
road. This puts all of your eggs into the third-party marketing basket.Third-party marketers have hundreds of potential clients approaching
them each year. It is risky to assume one will not only take you on as a
client but actually raise a sustainable level of capital for you.
3.You’re spending $8,000 on graphic design and web site design but
$0 on hiring someone who is an expert at constructing sales letters,
writing copy, and creating effective headlines and taglines for your po-
sitioning in the marketplace. Many times I see fund managers who want
to look very professional but there is no meat in what they are saying,no hook to draw in the reader.
4.Not dedicating resources to capital raising is the most obvious mistake
that I see in the industry. Many fund managers will act as the CIO,make two to three phone calls a week or sometimes per month, and
then wonder why they have not raised more capital. Performance does
notmarket itself, pedigree does notswing all doors wide open. You need
to have dedicated resources, an internal marketing resource working at
least 20 hours/week, investor databases so you can spend your time
calling on real prospects instead of always having to qualify them, and agrowing internal customer relationship management (CRM) or investor
relationship management (IRM) system in place to track the results of
your investment in investor relationships.
5.You speak at conferences full of your closest competitors instead of your
highest-value potential investors.
6.You underestimate the value of a ﬁrst-name-basis relationship with your
top investor prospects. Some professionals, especially those with tech-
nical backgrounds, think that marketing is a numbers game. Yes, yousometimes have to reach out to many to develop relationships with few,
but relationships are at the core of everything that gets done. Like Jeffrey
Gitomer says, “All things equal, people like to do business with friends;all things being unequal, people still like to do business with friends.”
7.Another mistake I see in the hedge fund space is a lack of capital-raising
training or fund-marketing instruction. You do not have to pay to haveyour marketing staff trained, but at the very least you should document
your own best practices, processes, and investor pipeline developmentHedge Fund Marketing Pro 49
plans, so they can be easily communicated to team members and board
members and then constantly improved each quarter.
8.You miss the boat on authority positioning, educational forms of mar-
keting, and improving your own pedigree standing within the industry.
9.You write off PR. Most managers shy away from or completely ignore
public relations as an avenue for helping create interest and positioning
for experts on their team. Many funds have now successfully employed
the media to spread messages about their fund.
10. A mistake that I see more than 90 percent of funds doing today is using
a boring, run-of-the-mill unique selling proposition (USP) or, worse yet,
not having one at all.
COPY WRITING
Copy writing is the use of words to promote a person, business, opinion,
or idea.
Copy writing is the most undervalued and overlooked tool that a
marketer or sales professional can develop. Many professionals value cold-
calling skills, networking, branding, or public relations skills but I think that
copy writing skills are the most valuable.
Top Five Reasons Copy Writing for Capital Raising Is Important
1.The headline of letters, subject line of e-mails, and ﬁrst few words of
speeches are the most important. Crafting a great headline can takehours to complete, but it will make the difference between being shown
to others and never being noticed.
2.Many hedge funds, family ofﬁces, and private equity groups spend over
$20,000 of their money on their marketing materials every year, yet
95 percent of decisions are based on what’s always been done or what
sounds good instead of A/B testing results to ﬁnd what is effective.
3.Every investment fund markets itself using e-mails and investor letters.
Without copy writing skills you may not only be failing to connect withyour audience but you could actually be turning them off and pushing
clients away.
4.Investment funds of all types are started by successful traders and port-
folio managers; very few are started only by marketers. Due to this
nature of how the business is founded and grown, managers overlook
niche marketing practices such as copy writing or see them as something
beneath them.
5.Ninety-nine percent of your competitors are not using copy writing best
practices.50 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of copy writing for capi-
tal raising, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Copywriting
CASE PROFILE
Fund name Tassini Capital Management
Strategy Long/short
Track record 4 years and 8 months
AUM $39.2 million
Team Brian Tassini, co-portfolio manager
Chris Tassini, co-portfolio manager
John Travis, junior portfolio analyst
Mary Powers, administrative assistant
In the past, Tassini Capital Management has conducted all marketing
efforts in-house, using Chris Tassini’s background in business and marketing
to approach potential investors. Over a period of four years their fund grew
from just $2 million at inception to $39.2 million. Their current AUMproﬁle is made up of family and friends’ money, high net worth accredited
investors, and wealth management ﬁrms. Figure 3.1 is a diagram showing
this breakdown in assets under management.
Family & Friends
HNW Individuals
Wealth Management
Firms$3.1 
$14.2 $22.2 AUM in Millions
FIGURE 3.1 AUM Distribution in Millions, Tassini Capital ManagementHedge Fund Marketing Pro 51
In the past, the team only spent a collective 15 hours a week in marketing
the fund or promoting their brand in the industry. This was carried out byChris Tassini, and most outgoing sales calls were to investors he had met at
conferences or networking events in the industry.
Tassini Capital Management has recently hired a proven third-party
marketing team to help them raise capital from new investors. A third-
party marketer is a professional who independently raises capital for fund
managers on a contractual basis, often raising capital for multiple funds atany given time (learn more at ThirdPartyMarketing.com). The goal is for
Tassini Capital Management to raise a total of $210 million and bring total
AUM up to $250 million in three years.
From the very ﬁrst day of working together, the third-party marketing
team started to make changes to the marketing materials, investor rela-
tionship management systems, investor databases, execution, and processes
followed while raising capital. The ﬁrst change made was to the marketing
materials of the fund. Tassini Capital Management had a new logo devel-oped, its PowerPoint presentation expanded, and one-pager redesigned as
well. A one-pager is a concise overview of a hedge fund’s track record, team,
performance ratios, and relative performance. The most important changeswere made to the PowerPoint presentation, often referred to as a deck or
pitch book in the industry. The advice the third-party marketing ﬁrm gave to
Tassini Capital Management regarding the pitch book included these tips:
/squaresolidMake the competitive advantage clear—make sure that the hedge fundhas a unique selling proposition (USP), not just a selling proposition.
Most funds talk about diversiﬁcation and a unique investment process
or team without much meat or real unique advantage presented.
/squaresolidThere should be three main areas of focus in the PowerPoint presen-
tation: team pedigree and experience, investment process, and risk
controls.
/squaresolidWork with the highest-quality service providers possible so that the funddoes not get scrutinized more than it already will in the normal course
of due diligence.
/squaresolidUse prime brokerage and fund administration business partners to
improve your marketing materials. These two service providers often
provide reporting and risk management aspects which beef up the insti-tutional feel of the organization.
/squaresolidDo not ever let the marketing presentation be longer than 30 pages. Itis challenging enough to get the attention of an investor long enough tothoroughly review a one-page marketing piece on your ﬁrm.
/squaresolidPurchase premium graphics for $2 at iStockphoto.com; develop profes-sional logos for your fund at Design99.com.52 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
/squaresolidUpdate the PowerPoint presentation quarterly with current performance
numbers that have been veriﬁed by the administrator or auditor.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on unique selling propositions (USP), please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/USP
Investor relationship management (IRM) systems were the next thing
that the third-party marketing ﬁrm improved. In the past, Tassini Capital
Management used a Microsoft Word investor tracking system, when onewas used at all. Now they pay a small amount per month for an account
with Salesforce.com, which allows them to track the history of their com-
munications with each investor and, even more importantly, alerts the teamwhen another contact point is needed with a potential investor. It took a
few months for the Tassini Capital Management staff to ﬁgure out how to
use everything in Salesforce.com, but ultimately they found it powerful andﬂexible to adjust as their fund grew.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on investor relationship management (IRM) pleasetype this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
Investor-Relationship-Management
Investor databases are something that Tassini Capital Management had
never used in the past. Through InvestorDatabases.com and with help from
the third-party marketer, they obtained contact details for over 1,000 po-
tential investors and put together a strategic plan for approaching 200 ofthem at any given time.
The method by which Tassini Capital Management was raising capital
in the past was not effective. In addition to not using an IRM system, theteam had somewhat randomly been approaching many different types of
investors, from large European banks to small seed capital providers. The
third-party marketing ﬁrm consulted Chris and Brian Tassini and found thatthey were both unwilling to part with equity ownership in the managementHedge Fund Marketing Pro 53
company of the fund in exchange for capital. They also reviewed past notes
and conﬁrmed that all efforts to work through institutional investment con-sultants had been stalled due to sub–$100 million AUM levels. The result
was a much more focused method of systematically approaching a mix of
investors which included 10 percent institutional investment consultants,
50 percent wealth management ﬁrms, 20 percent multifamily ofﬁces, and
20 percent high net worth individuals. While institutional investment con-
sultants were not going to invest any time soon, they were kept in the mixso that the team could continue to receive valuable institutional feedback
from the consultants.
Despite having hired an experienced third-party marketing ﬁrm for as-
sistance in raising capital, Tassini Capital Management consistently faced
two main challenges while developing relationships with investors. The
ﬁrst challenge was catching the attention of a potential investor. With so
many competitors in the industry offering similar strategies, it was hard to
stand out from the crowd. Convincing a potential investor to engage in a40-minute due diligence call was often in and of itself relatively signiﬁcant.
The second challenge the team faced was the noninstitutional feeling that
potential investors got while looking at their sub–$40 million portfolio andteam of four professionals. The business looked unsteady and unproven to
larger institutional ﬁrms that typically had expectations of $80 to $150 mil-
lion as a very minimum needed before allocations are made.
Over two years of trial and error and receiving advice from other
managers, Tassini Capital Management adjusted its marketing approach in
several ways to meet these challenges. Three changes included:
1.Implementing an institutional-quality multiple-modality marketing ap-
proach including e-mail marketing, conference speeches, article writing,phone calls, and traditional mailings. Each team member had a dif-
ferent role in this marketing approach which supplemented the work
completed by the third-party marketer.
2.Developing prewritten and scripted responses to questions regarding the
institutional quality of the ﬁrm’s trading, technology, risk management,
and investment research processes. This attention to these speciﬁc areas
of operations led to consistent improvements in how they are carried
out. Many of these changes were suggested by free-to-access institutionalinvestment consultants who had been called upon for feedback.
3.Constructing a sense of authority status around the ﬁrm through its
presence in the market. The team members matched this awareness inthe industry with improved branding and marketing materials and tried
to leverage this to meet in person with as many potential investors as
possible. Meeting investors face-to-face allowed them to get past thegatekeeper at many wealth management and family ofﬁce ﬁrms.54 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on systematic capital-raising tips, please type
this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Systematic
STEPHEN ABRAHAMS, VICE PRESIDENT OF
MARKETING FOR A LONDON-BASED HEDGE FUND
For this chapter’s ﬁrst interview, I sat down with Stephen Abrahams, who
raises capital for a London-based boutique hedge fund manager. Here he
shares some lessons and tips on what he has been doing to raise assets for
his fund.
Richard Wilson: What tips could you provide to hedge fund capital raisers
on developing investor relationships?
Stephen Abrahams: Keep in touch on a regular basis, ﬁnd out what they are
looking for, and ask for as much feedback as possible, good or bad. Seeif you can help them in any way, and always verify that you are speaking
with the right person at the ﬁrm.
Richard Wilson: That is good advice. The rule of thumb that I used while
raising capital was to keep in touch with my top prospects by mail,
e-mail, or phone once every 10 days, or about every week and a half.
With lower-priority prospects I would try to keep in touch twice a monthin some way. Do you use a CRM system of some type to manage investor
prospects?
Stephen Abrahams: We do not right now but I think they are a good idea.
Richard Wilson: I have used SalesForce and found it effective, but I have also
used an Excel spreadsheet to simply track investor contact details. I knowmany professionals, though, simply use Outlook’s contact databases, task
manager, and reminder system. How do you track the development of
your sales pipeline? Do you rate investor prospects to keep them in priorityfollow-up order?
Stephen Abrahams: I use an Excel sheet and contact cards along with
Outlook tasks and calendar synched to my iPhone.
Richard Wilson: How many investors is your hedge fund approaching or
calling in any three-month period—400 investors, 50 investors, 1,000
investors?Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 55
Stephen Abrahams: I approach 50 to 100 investors, but it would depend,
as I prefer to research and target more likely prospects rather than use ashotgun approach to cultivating new investors.
PRATIK SHARMA, MANAGING
DIRECTOR, ATYANT CAPITAL
For the next interview in this chapter I met with Pratik Sharma, managing
director of Atyant Capital, who has launched and raised capital for several
hedge funds in the past, learning some lessons and picking up ways of doing
business right along the way.
Richard Wilson: Pratik, can you ﬁrst share what some of your experience
includes?
Pratik Sharma: I’ve launched two funds in the past four years. One is a
long-only, deep-value fund focused on middle-market Indian equities.
The second one is a precious metals focused L/S fund investing in equities,
ETFs, futures, and options. I’ve had to learn foreign regulations fromscratch, learn how to work effectively with offshore service providers,
and do all the marketing and client relations work. I’m not a portfolio
manager, I am a capital raiser with a background in sales and managementconsulting.
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you use to market
your fund to new potential investors? Anything really unique?
Pratik Sharma: It’s pretty standard. We use a standard pitch book/fact sheet.
We are in the process of creating a more dynamic web site that integrates
a blog, performance reports, and all of our social networking efforts.
Richard Wilson: Do you use a CRM system? How do you track important
investor relationships or potential investor contact details?
Pratik Sharma: Yes, we use Salesforce.com to track our investor relationships
and to keep track of important developments over the long term.
Richard Wilson: That’s great. I have used Salesforce as well—it is a tool
that, if used right, I think can really improve the long-term ability to
raise capital even if it does take some extra time to store everything in
the system up front. Does your ﬁrm build organic investor databases orpurchase investor databases from others?
Pratik Sharma: We build our databases organically over time. Our web site
is designed to drive inbound interest and to keep that interest.
Richard Wilson: Some investor databases are not organized for capital rais-
ing and can be a relative waste of time. How long is your typical investor
sales cycle? Eight months? Twelve months? Eighteen months?56 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Pratik Sharma: We are focused on high net worth individuals and family
ofﬁces. When we raise capital from high net worth individuals our salescycle is two to three months.
Richard Wilson: What is the most valuable lesson you have learned while
raising capital over the past few years?
Pratik Sharma: You must have an easy-to-explain and compelling unique
selling proposition.
Richard Wilson: I am so glad you mentioned that, because I think it is
underestimated. To an investor who sees 100 presentations a month,
everyone looks the same, and it is hard to be truly unique and convey that
effectively in a meaningful way. Is there any one book, resource, tactic,or tool that has noticeably increased the ability of your ﬁrm to reach new
investors and raise more capital?
Pratik Sharma: We have found that white papers and webinars are the
most useful tools. They serve as a source of knowledge and insight for
your investors and help to grow the existing relationship. These toolsbuild credibility and demonstrate value even before a formal relationships
starts.
Richard Wilson: That is great. I know that this really works, and our ﬁrm
uses educational materials such as our free e-book on hedge funds for this
same reason. We provide something that beneﬁts our potential clients,
and then when they have a capital-raising or training-related need we can
be ready for them when they need us. I think that your fund is ahead of
90 percent of the hedge funds I speak to in realizing that if they invest
their time and energy into giving away educational content, free training,webinars, resources, and so on, it will come back to them several times
over through greater total and more loyal investors.
What are your top ﬁve tips to hedge fund managers who have less than
$100 million in assets under management but would like to improve the
institutional quality of their fund?
Pratik Sharma: I would suggest investing in your web site. Try to get feedback
from trusted contacts. Have a real USP that isn’t just ﬂuff—then you will
attract more investors than others in the industry.
Richard Wilson: Besides AUM, what do you believe is most important for a
hedge fund to focus on improving when thinking about institutionalizing
a hedge fund? Risk management? Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
Pratik Sharma: Risk management istrading. It is the way one really generates
alpha. Also, internal risk management (governance, controls) is key.
Richard Wilson: Agreed. I think that strict, independent governance and
controls are something that will be a must-have in ﬁve years instead of a
nice-to-have, as they seemingly are right now.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 57
Now that your hedge fund has grown a bit and has been around for a
few years what do you wish you had known when you ﬁrst started yourhedge fund? What should every new hedge fund start-up know that you
wish someone had told you?
Pratik Sharma: This business is the best in the world. It is still all about doing
the best for your customers. The arrogance and nonalignment of interests
in hedge funds has been atrocious over the last several years. Investors
aren’t stupid and they aren’t going to put up with it anymore. Embracethat as a differentiator, but recognize that you have to doit and not just
say it.
Richard Wilson: Great to hear that from a marketer. What three tips or
pieces of valuable advice could you lend to emerging hedge fund managers
or new hedge fund start-ups? What valuable lessons have you learned
from starting your fund, trading in the fund, and growing it that others
in similar situations could learn from?
Pratik Sharma: Get good service providers. Size is not necessarily better.
Some good administrators focus on early stage managers. They can be a
tremendous help.
Richard Wilson: I agree. While sometimes the brand or reputation of the
service provider may be important, I do think that there are times when
large service providers leave small hedge fund clients behind in terms of
service.
How long did it take you to launch your fund? About how much did
it cost in total, and what was the most difﬁcult or time-consuming part
about this process?
Pratik Sharma: We formed an offshore fund for India, which took three
months. Regulatory approvals were the most time-consuming part.
Onshore U.S. Limited Partnership (LP) took 30 days. The most difﬁ-cult part is that the manager has to manage the various entities involved.
It is a project, and if you don’t stay on top of all the moving pieces, it will
result in delays and increased expense.
Richard Wilson: Can you share a few mistakes or setbacks you encountered
that were painful and didn’t have to be experienced?
Pratik Sharma: Don’t have a bad or nondescript USP. You will get laughed
out of some ofﬁces.
Richard Wilson: Deﬁnitely worth repeating that point—I agree. What are
the top three resources or tools that you use to run your hedge fund that
are worth more than anything else? What are the most valuable resources
that you could recommend to others?
Pratik Sharma: Salesforce.com and ConstantContact.com are probably two
of the most useful tools.58 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: What is the critical issue that determines whether you work
with a particular consultant, service provider, or marketer? What is theone thing that you always look for? Good service? Recommendations
from others? Branding? Experience?
Pratik Sharma: It is a bit hard to describe. The best way I can articulate
it is “make sure there is a good ﬁt” in terms of experience, in terms of
expectations, and in terms of personalities. These service providers are
extensions of your organization. You want to make sure that you feelcomfortable having them interact with your clients. Your clients will call
them.
Richard Wilson: Exactly. I think that in some businesses you may use a
service provider to get Internet, or to ﬁnd new talent for your team, and
they are truly outside of your organization. In the hedge fund industry,
though, you are really outsourcing large chunks of your operations and
processes to these ﬁrms, so this is an important decision, whether it is a
third-party marketing, prime brokerage, or fund administration ﬁrm.
What is the most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-
month operations? How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What
tools have you found that help you manage this?
Pratik Sharma: The challenge is not to get sidetracked, and to stay focused.
The markets are volatile and you can’t let market volatility and resulting
mood swings get you off track. The way to do it is to set ﬁrm schedules
and to stick to them as much as possible. Plus, raising capital can’t be
done on a drive-by basis. You must deliver value in every interaction to
truly differentiate yourself. Just because you’re ready to take the capitaldoesn’t mean that your potential client is ready to make the allocation.
You can’t really control that. Make sure that you are delivering value, are
seen as trustworthy, and that you have a deﬁnable, unique edge. Whenthe client is ready, he or she will write the ticket.
Richard Wilson: Great advice there. I believe that what you just said there
will be worth more than 10 times the cost of this book to anyone who
is looking to raise more capital for their fund. Over 90 percent of the
hedge funds I speak to are not in a life cycle or track record position toattract a third-party marketer, yet they would like to have an outside party
complete their marketing for them. This is because they barely have time
to do marketing and they are not marketers at heart. What happens isthe portfolio manager or trader puts in three to ﬁve hours a week toward
marketing and, like you said, this becomes a drive-by effort and not much
capital is raised. I truly think that most hedge funds need to develop theirown internal marketing resources, tools, processes, pipelines, and talent.
That is how things ﬁnally get done in the majority of cases I have seen.
Thanks for sharing that bit.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 59
Do you have any other pieces of advice related to operational hedge
fund best practices that you could share with other managers in theindustry?
Pratik Sharma: This business is allabout raising capital. That is not to say
you can’t get anywhere without performance, but what differentiates a
hedge fund from a person trading in his gym shorts is the ability to raise
capital. Invest your time and money accordingly.
HENDRIK KLEIN, CEO, DA VINCI INVEST LTD.
The ﬁnal interview related to fund operations and institutionalization is
with Hendrik Klein, CEO of Da Vinci Invest Ltd., a Zurich-based hedge
fund professional whom I also interviewed for Chapter 2.
Richard Wilson: What have you learned that has enabled your ﬁrm to raise
capital to this point where you are managing a healthy stable level of
assets?
Hendrik Klein: It is challenging. Investors want liquidity, return, and no
risk. Additionally, you should have a Goldman Sachs partner background
with Harvard graduation.
Richard Wilson: I agree that pedigree is very important to investors regard-
less of their location. In the United States, and at least with my experience
in working with UK-based groups, most institutional investors are de-
manding $80 million to $100 million or more in single strategies managed
by fund managers. Is that what you have found as well?
Hendrik Klein: The fund volume should be above $50 million USD mini-
mum, although $100 million USD would not hurt, and a three-year trackrecord. The rest is a numbers game and the discipline to follow up on
every lead in 24 hours.
Richard Wilson: How has your ﬁrm gotten past the “under $100 million, no
institutional-quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smaller
investors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?
Any lessons learned here?
Hendrik Klein: Cooperate with other asset managers, go to family ofﬁces,
smaller funds of funds, and retail investors.
Richard Wilson: How long is your typical investor sales cycle? Eight months?
Twelve months? Eighteen months?
Hendrik Klein: On average, our sales cycle for new investors is eight months.Richard Wilson: What is the most valuable lesson you have learned while
raising capital over the past few years?
Hendrik Klein: Follow up in 24 hours. Keep it simple.60 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: What do you see as your main challenge in raising new
capital for your hedge fund?
Hendrik Klein: Explaining our compelling strategy in a way so that investors
feel comfortable to invest. Getting over the $50 million fund size with
every fund that we offer.
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you use to market
your fund to new potential investors? Anything really unique?
Hendrik Klein: Presentation, DDQ, fact sheet, references, press releases,
articles in magazines.
Richard Wilson: Do you use a CRM system? How do you track important
investor relationships or potential investor contact details?
Hendrik Klein: Yes, we use Salesforce, but we want to switch to Emnis in
2010.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the components of a hedge fund market-
ing system, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Marketing-System
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Tassini Capital Management was making several mistakes that emerging
hedge funds often make. These mistakes included:
/squaresolidNot strategically focusing on certain types of investors.
/squaresolidNot developing a system to track investor pipeline development.
/squaresolidNot developing or communicating an institutional-quality fund businesswhile speaking with investor ﬁrms.
Discovering these ﬂaws, thanks to their relationship with the third-party
marketer, led to several changes. The most important of these included:
/squaresolidUpdating marketing materials.
/squaresolidObtaining investor databases.
/squaresolidFocusing their investor prospects.
/squaresolidCommunicating a clear competitive advantage.
/squaresolidEmploying a multiple-modality marketing and sales approach.Hedge Fund Marketing Pro 61
This chapter covers many additional practical capital-raising best prac-
tices, unique positioning techniques being used by hedge funds today, anda hedge fund marketing case study. Here are some key lessons that can be
taken from this chapter:
/squaresolidDevelop a list of 10 to 15 publications you wish your hedge fund would
be featured in and approach them one by one.
/squaresolidWrite for audiences and speak at events full of prime prospects, notcompetitors.
/squaresolidDespite the constant search, there is no person or resource that is a real
shortcut to raising lots of capital for a hedge fund.
/squaresolidTo employ educational marketing, use folders, white papers,PowerPoint presentations, speaking, and writing, and focus on wealth
management and ﬁnancial planner markets.
/squaresolidUse the “Four Why Tool” instead of constantly seeking new investors
or larger investor databases.
/squaresolidThe difference between a $1 bill and $100 bill is the message on the
paper. Don’t underestimate the power of strong sales writing.
/squaresolidSales cycles for hedge fund investors may range from two to threemonths for high net worth investors to eight or more months for insti-tutional investors.
/squaresolidWebinars are a useful tool, and you must have a USP or you will be
ignored.
/squaresolidUse stories and personalized signatures and pictures in your marketing
materials.
/squaresolidAt any one time, target 50 to 150 investor prospects per marketing and
sales team member.
Free Resource : Learn more about hedge fund marketing at
ThirdPartyMarketing.com.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.What percent of institutional investors will not invest unless they
understand the investment being made?a.55
b.44
c.78
d.8862 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.While employing public relations tactics, target publications in
which you would aim to have your hedge fund or principal featured,and begin approaching them.
a.10 to 15
b.20 to 30
c.15 to 25
d.70 to 80
3.True or false: Somewhere around 50 percent of your competitors are
probably ignoring copy writing best practices.
4.Hendrik Klein suggests that investors want liquidity, returns, and
.
a.Tax assistance.
b.No risk.
c.Advice.
5.True or false: Large service providers are always better as they provide
more stable services and a more experienced team of professionals.
6.True or false: The “Four Why Tool” helps determine the real root
cause of a problem so you can directly solve that instead of focusing on
symptoms of a core issue your hedge fund is facing.
7.True or false: Multi-modality marketing material sets means having your
marketing materials translated into at least two different languages each
quarter.
8.The four main focuses of your PowerPoint presentation should be:
a.Team pedigree, returns, transparency, and risk controls.
b.Team pedigree, returns, ﬁnancial controls, and risk controls.
c.Team pedigree, experience, investment process, and risk controls.
9.Do not ever let your PowerPoint presentation reach more than
pages in length.
a.10
b.20
c.30
d.60
10. The most important part of your speeches, e-mails, or sales letter com-
munications are the:
a.Conclusions.
b.Personalized style.
c.Headlines and introductions.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 4
The Shooting Star
The skills that get you out of Egypt are not the same skills that will
bring you to the promised land.
—Joe Polish
This chapter focuses on managers of rapidly growing hedge funds, what
they typically invest in, and what they do to keep the growth of their
fund business moving forward. In this chapter, I touch on marketing tactics,
reinvestment focus, and team building.
Why important : Fast-growing “shooting star” hedge funds have dif-
ferent needs, challenges, and opportunities than emerging hedge funds and
giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds. The advice in this chapter is important be-
cause with consulting rates easily breaking $300/hour for this advice, mostprofessionals do not freely give it away online or at many conferences or
networking events.
18 LESSONS FROM SHOOTING STAR HEDGE FUNDS
Fast growing hedge funds are unlike most large and emerging hedge funds.
These managers have ﬁgured something out and are positioned to grow,
unlike more than 90 percent of the industry. Here are 18 lessons that can
be taken away from some of the fast-growing hedge funds we have worked
with:
1.They take transparency seriously and work to be proactively verytransparent—more so than their competition. They take transparencyinto consideration from the investor’s point of view.
63The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 64 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.They approach multiple investment channels but mostly ignore those
completely out of their reach (for example, they ignore potential pensionfund clients if they are running a $75 million fund).
3.They are always developing relationships and they have dedicated in-
ternal and some external professionals always selling on their behalf.
4.They not only seek pedigree on their team but they are always building
that pedigree through additional research, hiring of expert staff, and
through speaking and writing.
5.They document their operations and make decisions based on what
is best long-term for the organization rather than what is cheaper to
implement today. Like in any business, their ability to plan, strategize,and invest for the long-term forms a competitive edge for them in the
industry.
6.They have risk management and trading plans which are closely fol-
lowed. This helps them improve their actual trading results and provides
conﬁdence to investors since their historical trading actually matches upagainst the decision-making rules of their plans.
7.They know that “risk management,” while sounding less sexy than
“hedge funds,” is the business they are in, and they invest in their ownbusiness accordingly.
8.They have documented, tested, and third-party-veriﬁed ﬁnancial con-
trols, compliance processes, and audits completed at least quarterly,
and these reports are sent at least to board members if not also to
investors.
9.They invest in and improve their infrastructure every year, even if the
pay-off for doing so could be ﬁve to seven years away. Ironically, though,
these are sometimes the investments that pay off the soonest because
investors recognize the type of long-term investment being made.
10. They are experts at completing due diligence processes with institutional
consultants, family ofﬁces, and other types of institutional investors.
They have professionals who are trained for phone-based pitches and
sales, and handoffs during these processes are seamless.
11. Their marketing materials are just as good as those of the $1 billion
hedge funds because after investing $300,000 or more in infrastructure,
talent, research, and risk management, it would be a waste not to spend
$20,000 on presenting it in the right light in a professional manner.
12. They have seen the light that investing in the right areas does produce re-
turns, so they reinvest their money even faster and often more efﬁciently
than even small hedge funds on a tight budget.
13. They invest in training for their employees and board members with
whom they grow longer-term relationships than many emerging hedge
fund managers might.The Shooting Star 65
14. They are not only aware of the competition but they are watch-
ing them—not in terms of what they are investing in so much as what riskmanagement tools, software, trading tools, and USPs they are employing.
15. While hiring, they look for very speciﬁc skill sets and a minimum of
seven years of experience in the industry, unless they have a policy of
grooming from the ground up. Most fast-growing hedge funds I know,
though, like to hire professionals who can hit the ground running and
quickly integrate as part of the team. They actually have an HR depart-ment or at least one person who is head of talent development and
HR-related activities, something almost all small hedge funds lack.
When they are asked on the phone by institutional consultants if theyplan on adding anyone to their team, they have a sophisticated, intelli-
gent answer instead of the generic “We may add an analyst within the
next three quarters.”
16. They understand the “trust by verifying” mind-set of investors, and they
make it easy to verify everything.
17. They conduct more due diligence on business partners, investors, and
potential employees than some retail investors spend on investing in
small emerging managed hedge funds.
18. They realize their success is never going to be built on one software
program, capital-raising process, or investment trend, so they constantly
are working to build their 1,000 blocks of competitive advantage and
ability.
RICK NUMMI, PARTNER AND GENERAL COUNSEL,
ACCOUNTING AND COMPLIANCE
INTERNATIONAL (ACI)
This chapter’s ﬁrst interview is with Rick Nummi of ACI. Rick is a former se-
nior attorney with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) with
expertise in enforcement and regulatory defense and compliance. He is a na-tionally recognized authority in securities law, regulation, and compliance,
and is a featured speaker/educator at multiple industry (NRS, NSCP, NASD,
SEC) trade conferences and presentations. Rick is also an experienced ex-
ecutive with a strong track record of helping registered representatives and
broker-dealers succeed in a highly regulated industry.
Richard Wilson: Rick, ﬁrst off, I know that hundreds of professionals pay
to hear you speak at conferences, so I thank you for spending your time
sharing some knowledge about what fast-growing hedge funds are doing
here today with us.66 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Rick Nummi: My pleasure.
Richard Wilson: The focus of this chapter is a look into what fast-growing
hedge fund managers who are growing assets quickly are doing. What do
they invest in, what do they do differently? How are they growing their
asset size even more? Do you have any unique insights that may not be
mentioned anywhere else in this book related to these questions?
Rick Nummi: One of the things that we have seen is the utilization of the
required annual review and the utilization of compliance reviews andsign-offs. Many times now we bind our annual review with our pedigree
and background and provide it to their clients.
Richard Wilson: That is interesting; I have never heard of that happening
before in the industry. How is this different from what your ﬁrm has
experienced in the past while working with these same hedge fund clients?
Rick Nummi: Typically managers get these reports and sign-offs and hide
them under their desk.
Richard Wilson: What has led to this drastic change?Rick Nummi: Now some of these fast-growing managers are operating on
the assumption that “nobody trusts anybody,” and they take the per-
spective that while they simply do their internal review, they now needsomething more. Doing an internal review is somewhat like a BMW deal-
ership salesman saying the car checks out and looks like it is ready to
sell. These hedge fund managers would now like to show a signed-off
document packet to potential investors.
Richard Wilson: Exactly what types of hedge funds are asking for this extra
step—$1 billion-plus hedge funds? Hedge fund start-ups?
Rick Nummi: The primary differentiator here is that these are hedge fund
managers who understand that you can be proactive with your operations
and compliance and raise more capital by assuming that the general publicand your investors do not trust anyone. The common thread that I ﬁnd
is that these fund managers are the ones who are raising the new capital.
They are not all large or small, but they are effective at knowing what
investors now really want from them.
Richard Wilson: Some fund managers I speak to shy away from institution-
alization type discussions because they are already operating on a tight
budget. Does this type of reporting include any extra costs?
Rick Nummi: No, there are no extra costs, really. It does not cost anything
extra.
Richard Wilson: What happens if in your written report something is ac-
tually found? Then this transparent compliance strategy would backﬁre,wouldn’t it?
Rick Nummi: Potentially, yes, but some of these clients request that problems
are reported early so that they can be rectiﬁed before the report comesThe Shooting Star 67
out. In this way, by the time the report becomes public, the issues have
been addressed and handled.
Richard Wilson: This seems to be in line with the whole trend of institu-
tionalizing your hedge fund regardless of how large it is. Do you see the
institutionalization trend from your perspective?
Rick Nummi: Yes, very much so. The other twist is that the Investment
Advisor Act itself requires self-compliance. The difference between non-
successful clients and successful ones is that the fast-growing, shootingstar funds take proactive steps to go past self-examination and take it to
another level of sophistication and third-party veriﬁcation.
Richard Wilson: Have you actually seen this help increase assets under
management (AUM) for hedge fund managers?
Rick Nummi: Some funds that take these steps have done great during the
recent economic and hedge fund downturn.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other tips related to this proactive ap-
proach to becoming more transparent and then raising more capital be-cause of it?
Rick Nummi: Yes. I often look at the track records and look at the hedge
funds that are not growing and the ones that are really taking off in termsof assets, to see what makes one fund better than another fund. If you are
asked for a risk management process, portfolio construction documenta-
tion, and sign-offs and you can’t produce something in 24 hours, then it
is obvious what type of fund or business you are running. Additionally, if
you have completed all of the sign-offs and documentation yourself, that
also shows evidence that you have not taken it seriously.
Richard Wilson: Great feedback.
Rick Nummi: What is most interesting about this is that many hedge fund
managers will now eventually have to produce this report or sign-off onthe ﬂy. Investors may come in and say, “Before I invest, I want to see a
document saying that this is taken care of and veriﬁed by a third party.”
This means that the cost of the proactive approach is almost exactly the
same as the reactive one, except that there is no upside in being reactive.
When you are reactive you look weak, and you don’t stand out as beingproactive to all of those other investors who do not explicitly ask for this
level of documentation but who may still ﬁnd comfort in it. It may be one
of three things which really set your fund apart.
Traditionally, we have never had to place our pedigree right on our
compliance reports. Lack of pedigree in the reports was an industry stan-
dard, but recently hedge fund managers have been asking me to putin my biography in the ofﬁcial report and review. Now, investors are
judging the fund’s pedigree directly and indirectly through their service
providers.68 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of pedigree and a strong team for
hedge fund managers, please type this URL into your Web browser:http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Pedigree
Richard Wilson: I agree a hundred percent. I think the long-term difference
that steps like this can make could make or break a business in this
competitive industry.
Rick Nummi: We have many clients now come to us and say, “You worked
for the SEC—what should we be taking seriously? What else could we be
doing?”
Richard Wilson: Do you see any other trends in the actions of fast-growing
or large hedge fund managers? These are often the most secretive.
Rick Nummi: We also do due diligence for two of the top ﬁve hedge funds
in the United States. One of the interesting things that occurs when those
funds identify an investment opportunity in another fund is that, absent
a third-party review, those funds do not invest, ever. The institutionalpractices, justiﬁed or not, are being completed at all levels in all silos of
the industry. The big institutional ﬁrms drive the marketplace, and they
will take nothing at face value these days. They want everything complete
and every detail checked at every single turn.
Richard Wilson: What else have you seen happening to fast-growing hedge
funds lately in the industry?
Rick Nummi: The Madoff Effect. This is the client liquidating everything,
taking all of their money out of the fund, and then immediately putting it
back into the fund, just to see if they could do it.
Richard Wilson: That must be a relatively expensive experiment or risk
management check.
Rick Nummi: They typically don’t care if there are withdrawal penalties that
add up to 5 to 10 percent of assets. They just want to know that it can be
done. This is widespread with fast-growing small to medium-size hedgefunds, and this is not slowing down; typically one or two investors per
fund do this each year. When this is done they are really testing whether
the fund can execute what it promises. What is interesting is that our ﬁrmand many ﬁrms like ours can validate this with an independent report for
investors, but they don’t want that—they want a real live check on the
hedge fund manager.The Shooting Star 69
These are smart people investing in hedge funds, and this circles back
to our original point. The hedge fund managers who realize the public’smind-set are the ones who continue to grow at an astronomical rate. If
you don’t understand their gut feeling, you will not be successful. You
could very well be the best stock reader on the planet, but if you don’t
understand the individual investor and what keeps them up at night you
are sunk. Nobody is above scrutiny anymore. It doesn’t matter how many
assets under management you have, either.
Richard Wilson: That is interesting, because typically low AUM tends to be
what holds small and emerging hedge fund managers back from becoming
shooting star or giant hedge funds. While I know that demand and limi-tation have not been lifted, you wonder if this development will actually
level the playing ﬁeld, as some hedge funds do not have these proactive
reports and checks in place and other small funds that have historically
been ignored do. I think this may be an area of real opportunity for those
funds looking to pass the $100 million or $250 million threshold and startworking with more institutional ﬁrms.
Rick Nummi: I think you are correct in that assessment. In every challenge
there is an opportunity.
Richard Wilson: That leads to a question that many hedge fund managers
may be asking themselves when it comes to service provider partnerships.
How do they know who they should hire in this space?
Rick Nummi: We have a tool on our web site which helps fund managers
select compliance and regulation experts to work with. Here is an ex-
cerpt from this resource—16 questions that managers can use when theyinterview prospective service providers:
1.Was your ﬁnancial regulatory experience ...in my type of ﬁrm? Many
compliance consultants attempt to dazzle you with their former reg-
ulatory titles. In many cases, their previous experience wasn’t even in
your type of ﬁrm, or even worse, they have no prior regulatory experi-
ence whatsoever. Make sure your prospective consultant has relevant
experience in your type of ﬁrm.
2.What level of ﬁnancial regulator were you (examiner, branch chief,
associate director, director)? Just as in the ﬁrst question, prior regula-
tory experience as an SEC investment adviser examiner does you nogood if you are a broker-dealer. More importantly, experience as a
former examiner doesn’t give a big-picture view like more senior levels
of regulatory management. Do not hire a ﬁrm without checking forthe level of regulatory management expertise.
3.How long ago were you a ﬁnancial regulator? Many consulting
ﬁrms utilize long retired former regulators. The world has changed70 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
considerably in the past year (just think of the changes over the past 5 to
10 years). Make sure your consultant has recent regulatory experience.
4.When was the last conference you spoke at (that wasn’t hosted by
your ﬁrm)? Many consultants tout their public speaking engagements
as proof of competence. Make sure they let you know if the conference
they spoke at was hosted by their own ﬁrm. Would you rather have an
expert impartial consultant or someone trying to sell you a vacation?
5.When did you get your law degree? With the recent wave of regulatory
changes, more and more consultants are unable to understand the
legalese in which the new rules are written. If you hire a consultant,
shouldn’t he have the professional qualiﬁcations to explain the nuancesof the law? Why wouldn’t you want a consultant who is also a qualiﬁed
lawyer and/or a certiﬁed public accountant (CPA)?
6.How big was the ﬁrm where you were chief compliance ofﬁcer (CCO)?
Again, many consulting ﬁrms have so-called experts who have never
held senior positions at ﬁnancial ﬁrms. Wouldn’t it be nice to havesomeone who has walked in your shoes and understands your issues?
7.What certiﬁcations do you hold as an auditor or examiner? Your con-
sulting ﬁrm should be required to have staff that is just as qualiﬁed asyou are. Being an auditor or an examiner requires specialized training.
Ask them what professional designations they hold that qualify them
to do the work you require.
8.How many active ﬁnancial industry licenses does your staff hold? Your
consultant should have, at the very least, the same licenses you do. Ask
them what they are and when they got them.
9.How much ﬁnance or accounting experience do you have? A consul-
tant should be appropriately experienced in his/her ﬁeld. Ask them
how much experience they have, when, and who for. Hyperbole suchas “120 years of experience” or “We have been around the longest”
is meaningless if the company was bought or sold and/or key person-
nel have left. The better question is: “How much experience do you
have?”
10. What publications have quoted you on compliance topics? Your con-
sultant should be just as comfortable being quoted in the Washington
Post or on CNBC as discussing the same issue with you. Most major
media personnel understand the concept of credibility and why it isabsolutely necessary before quoting someone. Ask your prospective
consultant for their quotes. Most are justiﬁably proud of their appear-
ances in the media. Conversely, if they have never been quoted, youmay wonder why not.
11. Do you write your own procedures manuals and, if so, why? A con-
sulting ﬁrm should be consulting, not creating products for sale. YourThe Shooting Star 71
ﬁrm is charged by law with crafting and editing procedures manuals.
Every regulatory examiner can spot a canned boilerplate manual.
12. How many fully qualiﬁed (in all areas: Investment Advisor, Broker-
Dealer, hedge fund, banking) consultants do you have? Many ﬁrms
have consultants who are fully versed in only one area of the ﬁnancial
industry. Wouldn’t you prefer a fully versed consultant, experienced
and licensed across all relevant areas? Only through broad experience
can a consultant assist you with ﬁtting the disparate pieces together.Don’t settle for less.
13. At how many legal proceedings have you testiﬁed as an expert witness?
The legal system understands qualiﬁcations even better than you do.You must be certiﬁed as an expert in your ﬁeld prior to the forum
accepting your testimony. A good consultant will have testiﬁed (and
been certiﬁed) many times. Ask them about the last time they testiﬁed.
14. Precisely how many of each of these have you personally examined:
Broker-Dealer, Investment Advisor, hedge fund, bank? Make sure you
get the consultant’s scorecard. It is how consultants rate each other. It
is also how you evaluate the depth of experience of your prospective
consultant. An answer of 3-1-0-0 is not very comforting.
15. How many existing (i.e., paid you in the past six months) clients do
you have? Many consulting ﬁrms advertise a large number of clients.
However, just like in the ﬁnancial services industry, things change. The
more relevant question is “How many paid you last year?” You are
required to carefully evaluate advertising. Choosing a consulting ﬁrm
requires the same diligence to avoid exaggerated claims.
16. Are you the consultant that will be assisting me? Many ﬁrms will
discuss all of the preceding questions generically—that is, “We have
99 lawyers, 4,000 clients, 55 CPAs,” and so on. You want to knowwhether the 99 lawyers will all be assisting you. Actually, what you re-
ally want to know is, “What qualiﬁcations does myconsultant have?”
Also be wary of the bait and switch, or “We use a team approach,”
which translates to “We sold you X and we are giving you Y.” The
hiring of a consultant is an important decision. You should meet them,question them, and make sure the ﬁt is good before agreeing to a long-
term commitment.
Richard Wilson: Great questions to ask. Many of these questions could be
rephrased to help fund managers hire other types of service providers and
partners as well, so I will make sure and keep this in the main sectionof the book and not demote it to an appendix where it may be missed.
Thank you for your time today, Rick.
Rick Nummi: Thank you for the opportunity, Richard.72 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
THOMAS POWELL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
ELP CAPITAL
The next interview in this section on shooting star hedge funds is with
Thomas Powell, chief executive ofﬁcer of ELP Capital, a Nevada-based
hedge fund. As chief strategist, Mr. Powell has combined his education andexperience in commercial and retail banking, mortgage banking, real estate
development, and corporate ﬁnance and governance to successfully lead
the company through several periods of market growth and contraction.Mr. Powell also serves as the company’s chief investment ofﬁcer, helping
to identify and structure investment vehicles creating solid investment op-
tions for ELP Capital Advisors’ family of funds, institutional investors, andindividual project investors.
Richard Wilson: What should very quickly growing hedge funds of $100 mil-
lion invest their money in as they grow? What is most important?
Tom Powell: I believe there is nothing that dictates a company’s success more
than the quality of the individuals who make up its team. Investing in and
attracting quality employees will continue to pay dividends throughout acompany’s life span.
Richard Wilson: I agree that pedigree and team are very important. In many
capital market vehicles, whether it be private equity, hedge funds, venturecapital, or angel investing, the team is the element that investors focus
on most when deciding whether to get involved. Today’s hedge fund
industry has developed to the point where many managers can increase
their team pedigree by hiring an outsourced CCO, building a strong board
of advisers, or choosing authority service providers. There are many ways
to grow a team.
Where do you see hedge funds slowing down their own growth due to
lack of resources or skills? What mistakes do you see being made by very
fast-growing $100 million-plus funds?
Tom Powell: Quality hedge funds are slowing down their growth in order
to strengthen their systems and structures. Doing so enables successful
funds to be highly efﬁcient and helps them to prepare for the future.
Putting priority on systems and structures can keep hedge funds operating
consistently no matter how volatile market conditions may become.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see either shooting star hedge
funds or giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds implementing that almost all
small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Tom Powell: Big hedgers talk equally of both long- and short-term goals
and strategies. Small funds are more centered around their short-termThe Shooting Star 73
strategies and they communicate those targets. Such a short-term focus
inevitably comes across in a fund’s identity, and its managers lose focuson larger goals. The bigger funds, at least the successful ones, are able to
think and act on a more global level.
Richard Wilson: This goes hand in hand with what we hear from Rick
Nummi of ACI, that you have to speak with the same language and mind-
set as your investors. I believe that even if most institutional investors
are sensitive to short-term volatility, they also have long-term investmenthorizons and global perspectives.
What insights do you have on the operational best practices or issues of
these shooting star hedge funds like your own?
Tom Powell: Investors are now demanding that hedge fund ﬁrms be trans-
parent. These difﬁcult times have investors completing more prudent due
diligence. In order to remain competitive in the marketplace, hedge fund
managers have to be compliant and open with their processes. Trans-
parency is by no means a new practice, but it has certainly gained im-portance in the minds of investors. Many hedge funds are employing
name-brand, top-notch rating agencies to help highlight their dedication
to being transparent.
Richard Wilson: I have heard from professionals of every type of hedge fund
regarding the importance of transparency. This is obviously a hot button
right now with investors. I want to acknowledge that while this advice is
repeated in this text, I am not going to edit that out—I want to make sure
its importance is not overlooked.
Everyone talks about the importance of institutional quality operations,
but from your perspective, where should fast-growing hedge fund man-
agers be reinvesting their money to improve their operations?
Thomas Powell: Without a doubt, hedge fund managers should be placing an
emphasis on strengthening their systems and structures. This recession has
badly shaken the investment world and now is the time to be building for
(and adapting to) the future. Hedge fund managers must choose to either
build the systems and structures internally or outsource the responsibility.
Either way, they have to be operational and highly efﬁcient. A fund canbe producing phenomenal returns, and sales can be bringing in capital
hand-over-ﬁst, but without efﬁciency your customers will lose their trust
and take their money elsewhere.
Richard Wilson: Great advice. Systems and structures of high-quality oper-
ations are as important to a fast-growing hedge fund as they are to any
fast-growing business, yet small to medium-size hedge funds that I havespoken with rarely use ﬂow charts, project managers, or hire operational
consultants to streamline activities.74 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Within this chapter on fast-growing hedge funds I interviewed experts who
offer some advice, trends, and tips on what some of these fast-growing
hedge funds are doing that may be different from both emerging hedge fund
managers and giant $1 billion-plus hedge funds. Some key lessons from this
chapter include the following:
/squaresolidSome hedge funds are now asking for the pedigree of the service provider
to be attached to every report, analysis, and sign-off, to assure investors
that it is being completed by experts in the ﬁeld.
/squaresolidRick Nummi suggests that the hedge funds he knows that are quickly
gaining assets are those which realize that at some level “nobody trusts
anybody.” You must keep that in mind while making decisions oninfrastructure, reporting, service provider selection, transparency, liq-
uidity, and things like lock-up periods and gating clauses.
/squaresolidFast-growing hedge funds are prepared for and very responsive to in-
vestor demands for compliance or risk-reporting documentation.
/squaresolidTalent is what one Nevada hedge fund CEO suggests as the most com-mon element of a fast-growing hedge fund.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.Thomas Powell of ELP Capital believes that while returns and marketing
are important, without you will lose the trust of investors and
fail as a business.
a.A high pedigree team
b.A web site
c.Corporate quality real estate
d.Operational efﬁciency
2.True or false: Recently transparency has become less important, because
after Madoff most of the large frauds in the industry have been quicklyuncovered.
3.One key difference between fast-growing and successful hedge funds
and those that have not raised much capital is that the fast-growinghedge funds focus more on the
goals and less on the
goals.a.Long-term, short-term.
b.Short-term, long-term.
c.Capital-raising, operational.
d.Capital-raising, compliance.The Shooting Star 75
4.Investors reward those hedge funds with proactively with
respect to capital allocations.a.Aggressive capital-raising strategies.
b.Fast-growing teams.
c.Transparent operations.
5.Rick Nummi suggests that those hedge fund managers who understand
will grow at an astronomical rate compared to others
with similar opportunities.a.The political nature of investments.
b.The mind-sets of investors.
c.The laws preventing certain types of investments.
d.The taxes that affect hedge fund investments.
6.What is referred to as the Madoff Effect within this chapter is the
practice of investors:
a.Demanding quarterly fraud checks.
b.Completely liquidating their assets within the fund.
c.Asking for hedge funds to start using independent administration
ﬁrms.
d.Requiring most hedge funds to have an in-house chief compliance
ofﬁcer.
7.Many hedge funds try to be too
to investor demands when
really they could have an edge and improve their whole business bybeing more
.
a.Large to meet, small business-like.
b.Reactive, aggressive.
c.Reactive, proactive.
d.Aggressive in raising capital and working, patient.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 5
Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru
I hated every minute of training, but I said, “Don’t quit. Suffer
now and live the rest of your life as a champion.”
—Muhammad Ali
Thousands of hedge funds are started each year, but not all survive. Many
start-ups are stopped in their tracks before they ever begin trading the
portfolio. This chapter provides some hedge fund start-up-related tips as well
as interviews with hedge fund start-ups that have survived and succeeded
in hiring, raising capital, and operating for several years. In this chapter
managers share lessons they have learned, what they wish others had told
them before launching, and their top tips for emerging hedge fund managers.
Why important: Over 1,000 hedge funds are launched each year. Despite
this high level of competition, most hedge funds repeat the same mistakes as
they launch their businesses. This is not necessarily the fault of the hedge fund
manager, because information on starting a fund is sparse and often only
provided by ﬁrms with a strong vested interest in directing your hard-earned
dollars toward their bank accounts. Through this chapter you will be able
to quickly pick up valuable lessons from those who have started and grown
their hedge funds, and worked with thousands of fund manager start-ups.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on wow to start a hedge fund, please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Start-A-
Hedge-Fund
77The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 78 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
TOP FIVE TIPS FOR STARTING A HEDGE FUND
I recently completed a consulting engagement with a group of professionals
who wanted my most concise tips on how they should launch and start their
hedge fund, what they should focus on, and what expectations they should
have. Here are some of my pieces of advice to them.
1.Starting a hedge fund is not a get-rich-quick scheme. In 90 percent of the
cases our ﬁrm has witnessed, it takes at least three to ﬁve years before
the hedge fund becomes proﬁtable and stable as a business. I’ve worked
with a client in the past who had been running a fund for seven yearsand still had not raised enough capital to be self-sustaining.
2.Always complete due diligence on your service providers. I know of a
hedge fund manager who, in 2009, was given a quote of more than
$80,000 for some very simple legal formation costs, which is at least
$35,000 above what most other ﬁrms charge for this same service. If newhedge funds do not shop around, they could end up paying twice as much
to service providers as they need to. No, hedge fund start-ups should
not select service providers based on price—but they should always sitdown or have conference calls with at least three prime brokerage ﬁrms,
three auditors, and three administration ﬁrms before deciding who to
work with.
3.Always be growing relationships. This is not the same as “always be
selling.” Selling can be spotted from ﬁve suits away at a networking
event, and felt in how someone asks what company you work for andwhat your role is there. It is always best to take the high road, the long-
term approach, yet always be looking for those individuals whom you
should invest a signiﬁcant portion of your time getting to know. Thebeneﬁts of doing so could be valuable advice, leads, or an allocation. If
you are always looking too closely, then no professionals along the way
will want to give you feedback on your marketing materials or suggest
an alternative path to raising assets.
4.Focus on risk management and the investment process more than on
high performance returns. Yes, investors want to see strong returns,
but a top-ﬁve sign of a green hedge fund manager is someone who
constantly pushes his extremely high returns found in back-testing orhis ﬁrst four months of operating. Doing so ruins your chance of serious
consideration as it gives off the impression that your fund will reach
for those returns at any cost or risk. Speaking about returns too muchdetracts from conﬁdence in your fund’s investment process and risk
management controls.
5.Invest in yourself. Choose high-quality service providers. Build a team.
Break down your investment process into concrete steps, and spendHedge Fund Start-Up Guru 79
50 hours creating a solid PowerPoint presentation/pitch book for your
fund. Don’t show it to a single investor until you have completed ﬁvedrafts of it. Too many times I see hedge fund managers looking to raise
capital who have not yet taken the time to organize their own thoughts,
plans, or marketing materials. If your hedge fund is not worth your
own investment of time, why should anyone else invest their time and
possibly capital into it? Investors look for signs of a manager having
skin in the game in multiple ways.
Most hedge fund start-ups I speak with want referrals to respected ser-
vice providers or advice on attracting seed capital. Almost none have a
business plan for their hedge fund and only a few have PowerPoint presen-tations explaining their investment strategy. If you are a fund manager in
this position, that doesn’t mean you have done anything wrong, but you
may consider writing both a hedge fund business plan and a comprehen-
sive 15- to 25-page PowerPoint presentation now to make it easier to work
with service providers, third-party marketers, institutional consultants, and
potential investors.
Your hedge fund business plan should include information about the
following:
/squaresolidManagement. What team members are required to run the fund effec-
tively? What is the chain of command? How are decisions made? What
happens if two or three professionals disappear tomorrow? Who would
take over responsibilities and what would happen to your investors’funds? The importance of a well-constructed and well-managed team
cannot be overstated.
/squaresolidInvestment process and risk management. Managing risk is what run-
ning a hedge fund is all about. Meet with your prime brokerage ﬁrm’s
risk advisory division, speak with your traders and portfolio managers,
and network with other managers to pick up some best practices in this
space. At the end of the day, your risk management approach, invest-
ment process, and team must be molded into one cohesive group all
pointed in the right direction. There is no magic bullet to raising assets
or gaining seed capital, but getting this combination right is the most
important thing you can focus on.
/squaresolidService providers. Who are you going to use as your prime brokerage
ﬁrm, fund administrator, auditor, or third-party marketer? How
will this evolve as your fund passes the $100 million and $300 mil-lion marks? Will you use multi–prime brokerage services? Capital
introduction teams? Multiple third-party marketers? Your choice of
ﬁrms in this space can affect the levels of assets you manage, the qualityof advice you receive, and the reputation of your ﬁrm as a whole. My80 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
advice would be to meet and interview at least three service providers
of each type in person or over several phone calls, and go with one thatis well experienced yet not so large that your sub–$1 billion account is
an annoyance to them.
/squaresolidInfrastructure and technology. Meet with other local hedge fund man-
agers, your trader, your prime brokerage ﬁrm, and other service
providers to nail down exactly what you will need in terms of reporting,
processing, and functioning not only as a hedge fund but as a small busi-ness. When you start a hedge fund you become an entrepreneur, and
you have to face all of the challenges that accompany that distinction in
addition to those challenges found in managing your portfolio. Manyfunds underestimate the costs of some of the technology needed to op-
erate as they grow beyond the simple $1 to $5 million fund operations.
/squaresolidMarketing . Nothing is traded or managed until the dollars come in.
Anyone who joins your ﬁrm or board will want to know how you
plan to grow your business. What channels of investors will youapproach—institutional investors including funds of hedge funds, con-
sultants, large family ofﬁces, pension funds or smaller family ofﬁces,
wealth management ﬁrms, high net worth (HNW) individuals, and ac-credited investor clubs? Here is a hint: In our asset-raising experience,
the latter should be 80 percent of your focus if you are managing less
than $100 million. What resources do you or should you have in placeto meet these goals? Third-party marketers? Databases of investors?
An in-house marketing specialist? How much does this cost and when
should these resources be put in place?
HEDGE FUND PITCH BOOK CREATION
Following is a list of tips for professionals looking to create a pitch book
for their hedge fund. My advice to both $90 million and $1 million hedge
funds is that you can never start this process too early. It is an iterative and
constantly evolving project which will never be complete. Here are the top
10 tips for creating hedge fund marketing materials.
1.Think long-term. Invest in creating a robust, institutional-quality pitch
book the ﬁrst time around, and complete ﬁve drafts of it internally
before showing it to a single investor.
2.Emphasize the strengths of your team, investment process, and risk
management controls and how they all interact inside the operations of
your hedge fund.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 81
3.Make your competitive advantage clear and do not rely on canned
phrases such as “positive returns in bull or bear markets.” Anyone whoreviews hedge fund materials for a living will see these by the hour. Your
advantage must be unique.
4.Stress the importance and individual functions of the team, their expe-
riences, and their pedigree. This should be the foundation upon which
everything else is built.
5.Do not send any pitch book or marketing material out before speaking
with a qualiﬁed compliance or legal counsel on the team.
6.Create a one-page marketing sheet, a PowerPoint presentation of 13
to 20 or more slides, and a one-page newsletter which would be re-leased monthly providing your view of the markets in your niche area
of expertise.
7.Work with high-caliber service providers so that you don’t draw extra
skepticism as a relatively new fund, which may already be receiving
extra scrutiny by potential investors and advisers.
8.Use your whole team, your prime brokerage business partners, and
other service providers to improve your marketing materials. Profes-
sionals who work in prime brokerage or administration see many typesof marketing materials and can help provide valuable feedback at no
additional cost to your fund.
9.Do not create a PowerPoint presentation that is longer than 30 slides.
There are some institutional money managers who run three similar
funds and will sometimes cover each of these in a single presentation,
but this is the exception. Ninety-ﬁve percent of the people to whom youwill send the PowerPoint presentation will not read more than 15 pages
of the material unless you are walking them through it over the phone
or in person.
10.Purchase the rights to graphics; choose a unique, simple, professional
layout for the presentation; and use the newest software diagramming
tools to create an institutional-quality presentation. Coming into a meet-
ing with a Word document or 25 pages of bullet points is not very ef-
fective. It is hard enough to catch investors’ attention and bring them tothe table to discuss your fund. You don’t want to lose them due to the
aesthetics of your PowerPoint.
SYED ALI, CEO, SATURN PARTNERS, LLC
For this chapter I interviewed Syed Ali, CEO of Saturn Partners, LLC. Ihave had a relationship with Syed for close to two years, ﬁrst starting as a
consultant to help his company update their marketing materials and most82 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
recently by joining their advisory board as a business development adviser.
I sat down with Syed to have him share his story of how he started hishedge fund.
Richard Wilson: I speak with lots of professionals who want to start one
but they are not sure if they have the “right” background. How exactly
did you get to start your own hedge fund?
Syed Ali: I found a passion in trading when I saw an ad in a commodities
magazine. I initially started trading in silver futures and lost the entire
$10,000 I had saved diligently. At that time I was in part-time management
at UPS and would make my trades on a phone while I was supervising mycrew, and at that time there were no cell phones. Shortly thereafter my
manager wanted me to get into full-time management, but a requirement
then was that everyone had to drive a delivery package car for a period
of time. So I saved up $75,000 over time and was trading silver, orange
juice, sugar, and the grains. It was a good thing I was single at that time.The only way I could trade back then was using all the pay phones on my
delivery route. Looking back, it certainly was amazing I delivered all the
packages in a timely manner. I went through more hardships and lost allthe money.
Richard Wilson: That must have been a humbling experience.
Syed Ali: This was a very humbling experience but I still had a passion
for trading. I then met a person named Don M., and that was a turning
point in my life. Since he had the ﬁnancial means, he suggested that I
trade for him. I traded stocks and it took a few more years to develop ourmethodology. This man is one of the most patient and honorable people I
have ever known. We decided to start a hedge fund so we could reap some
of the rewards for all the work that was put into our system.
Richard Wilson: So when did you actually launch your hedge fund?
Syed Ali: We started trading operations in November 2006 as a long/short
equity fund. Leading up to this we hired a law ﬁrm to do our private
placement memorandum (PPM), and then we had to get an accountant
and shortly thereafter an auditor. We did this as we went along, hoping
to avoid any land mines. Since we had a positive year in 2006 and 2007,
we thought that it would be a little easier raising funds, but that was not
the case. I made contact with the person at my brokerage ﬁrm at the endof 2007 to see if he could be of assistance in raising funds, but he did not
have a decent platform. In June 2008, through the help of our auditor,
we switched brokerage ﬁrms since they had a good platform in raising myassets under management (AUM).
Although 2008 was a tough year for us and many others, we had a gain
for the year. I was relieved because I don’t think I slept from SeptemberHedge Fund Start-Up Guru 83
2008 to December 2008, and that had to be the toughest period I had
encountered. With all the turmoil in the markets, it looked very grim forour fund in raising AUM, since redemptions were the only game in town.
I was hoping that things would change toward the latter part of 2009. Let
me say this, that along the way there were many people who helped us,
and that is an essential ingredient to survivability.
Richard Wilson: So what have you learned the hard way by launching your
own hedge fund that you wish someone had told you before you startedyour hedge fund business? What lessons could you share with others now
starting hedge funds?
Syed Ali: Since I do not live in a large city, it was tough to get certain
questions answered in relation to launching a hedge fund since there
were many local professionals who had no idea what a hedge fund was
about. Actually our ﬁrst accountant had to educate himself on hedge fund
accounting. I wished I was connected to a network of informed individuals
who could have walked me through the process. I wished that someonehad informed me that it was going to be a tough road and that just
having good returns was not the only factor in raising funds. Completing
the Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional (CHP) Designation Program bythe Hedge Fund Group helped; the articles, required readings, and video
content give valuable information for those starting funds. The CHP helps
with credibility, foundational industry knowledge, and the ability to speak
the industry language.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of hedge fund training, please
type this URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/
Online
Richard Wilson: While I know that some cities such as New York, London,
and Geneva are famous for housing thousands of hedge funds, I havespoken with hundreds of funds in Alaska, Egypt, Sydney, Moscow, and
S˜ao Paulo in similar situations as you were. I think that identifying proper
advisers and consultants along the way is critical to keep you on a straightpath; sometimes the wrong service providers can cost you years of time
and possibly even the viability of your business. Do you have any other
advice related to service providers that you learned along the way?84 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Syed Ali: Yes, we also learned that it was important to have a knowledgeable
law ﬁrm that not only can help with a PPM but could guide one throughthe many pitfalls of what can or cannot be disclosed or said. Also, hav-
ing a multipartner accounting ﬁrm as a hedge fund administrator to put
investors at ease and possibly guide you to grow organically.
Richard Wilson: What if you had just one piece of advice you wanted
a hedge fund manager to take away from this interview? What
should they keep in mind and remember each day while running theirbusiness?
Syed Ali: Continue to post returns with minimum drawdowns. This is prob-
ably the most important advice I can give anyone. Be patient. Do notrisk too much on one company or event. Anticipate and do not react. If
you are unsure, get out. Make sure you ﬁnd an established hedge fund
administration ﬁrm and law ﬁrm that have a good platform for them to
help you grow out your infrastructure. The hardest thing I learned was to
control drawdowns. This is a must in the ﬁrst three years, which are themost critical.
Richard Wilson: That is great advice. I actually hear a mirror of that ad-
vice from investors often. Most investors have little patience for volatilereturns. Wealth management and family ofﬁce investors especially have a
hard time explaining to their end HNW or ultra high net worth (UHNW)
investors why their portfolio might ﬂuctuate, and this can lead to re-
demptions. I think your advice here is in line with my experience that the
stability of solid performance is one of the top three things investors look
for. How long did it take you to launch your hedge fund?
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video called “What Is a Family Ofﬁce?” please type thisURL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Family-
Ofﬁce
Syed Ali: It took us six months to launch our fund from start to ﬁnish.
We formed our fund around an LLC and the total cost of doing so was
$25,000.
Richard Wilson: I think that is important to share. I often see two extremes
in the industry. Either hedge funds pay $80,000 to $120,00 or more forHedge Fund Start-Up Guru 85
more simple types of fund formation services when they could get the
same services for $30,000 to $60,000 from another experienced ﬁrm, ormanagers see this cost as unneeded and they try to ﬁnd someone to form
their fund for $2,000 or less. Most of the hedge fund experts and consul-
tants I work with agree on $15,000 to $60,000 being what most hedge
funds need to spend to retain quality legal advisory services while forming
their funds. The more complicated the structure, the more expensive this
part of the start-up process tends to be. What was the most difﬁcult partof this formation process for you?
Syed Ali: The most difﬁcult part for me was understanding all of the doc-
uments to the hedge fund, such as the PPM, and being knowledgeableenough to speak with investors and discuss the different sections of the
documents.
Richard Wilson: What do you see as the main challenge of running a hedge
fund today?
Syed Ali: The main challenge I see is reestablishing trust and being as trans-
parent as possible, in light of market conditions and fraud. I also feel
that it’s very challenging to get to the next step from being a one-man
or one-woman shop into broadening out the infrastructure into a realbusiness.
Richard Wilson: I agree. I believe that having the right pedigree on your
team, an audited track record by a well-known ﬁrm, an independent
board, and great service providers can help investors hedge against this
fraud risk to some degree. These are moving from the nice-to-have box
to the must-have box quickly. What do you believe is helping you raiseassets right now?
Syed Ali: I feel that being in as many databases online as possible, developing
great marketing materials, and using the type of capital-raising articles andadvice you provide with an in-house team is what is needed to grow an
emerging hedge fund.
Richard Wilson: What types of marketing materials do you currently use?
Syed Ali: We have a one-page marketing PDF that summarizes our strat-
egy and performance. We then also have a detailed 26-page PowerPointpresentation which covers our team, investment principles, investment
process, risk management processes, performance, terms, and service
providers. We have poured a lot of time into this one document andit is the key tool we use to market our fund to new investors.
Richard Wilson: Thank you for your time and sharing what you have learned
while growing your hedge fund. I’m sure this will be helpful to many otherswho hope to follow this same path at some point.
Syed Ali: Thank you.86 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
NAKUL NAYYAR, QUANTITATIVE
TRADING/SUPPORT, QUAD CAPITAL
My next interview was completed with Nakul Nayyar, an expert in trading
who works for a U.S.-based hedge fund manager; he was also interviewed
in Chapter 2.
Richard Wilson: What would you say are the top four most common or
dangerous trading-related mistakes of hedge fund start-ups or emerging
hedge fund managers?
1.I think all parties are aware on a certain level that the immediate re-
sults are of vital psychological importance. Though the fund may have
been marketed for longer-term performance, investors are watching
your ﬁrst performance reports with a lot of interest. Although it’s nextto impossible to time your returns, it is important that managers stay
focused and disciplined on risk management and speciﬁcally on avoid-
ing drawdowns early on. The excitement and pleasure of performingwell early on can create overconﬁdence, overselling, and overhype,
which could work adversely. Conversely, poor performance can lead
to undisciplined or revenge trading, which obviously can have negativeconsequences. Practical advice is to play small, put some green on the
screen, and most importantly to get the investors comfortable with you
as a manager and your trading style.
2.Don’t be afraid to start small. One doesn’t need to start a fund with
$100 million, the best accounting and auditing, and spacious ofﬁces.
Look seriously at a managed-account structure to start. These offerlow start-up costs, transparency, and reporting through the broker.
Don’t put the cart in front of the horse; your absolute main goal at
start-up is to deliver the performance that was marketed. Once track
record and performance are established, the capital will come. If your
strategy involves illiquid or hard-to-value (read: non-exchange-traded)assets, then consider the private equity route as opposed to a hedge
fund.
3.Proprietary trading and hedge fund trading are different animals. At
the risk of making generalizations, it has been my experience that prop
traders usually emphasize absolute return giving a certain amount of
risk. Hedge fund traders, by contrast, emphasize risk-adjusted perfor-mance, primarily because most investors do as well. Additionally, prop
traders are allowed large latitudes in terms of strategy, whereas a hedge
fund trader may be constrained to a speciﬁc approach of asset class.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 87
These are extremely important distinctions and should not be taken
lightly.
4.Failing to differentiate your fund in a mountain of other similar funds
is another big mistake. You have highlighted this a few times at Hedge-
FundBlogger.com and through your Hedge Fund Group. Networking
and contacts are usually the best methods to attract capital in early
stage start-ups. However, if a fund is forced to utilize more traditional
challenges, then remember to account for the other 100 or more ﬁrmsthat also boast an impressive track record, low risk, diversiﬁcation,
and so on, that you outline in your marketing approach. The topic of
differentiation should be of primary focus in the funds marketing plan.
Richard Wilson: I agree. Paying close attention to drawdowns and positions
that are bleeding is something I hear traders refer to often. I think that
watching your month-to-month performance is more important any other
metric or time frame, really. Even seven-year track records get broken
down to the month-to-month level of scrutiny and curiosity.
Can you suggest four best practices or valuable trading lessons learned
through all of your experience? These lessons could be related to working
on a trading team, using the right trading tools, developing your own
system, cutting losses, and so on.
Nakul Nayyar: Sure, here are my top four best practices or best pieces of
trading-related advice that I can provide:
1.Risk management is everything. There are a thousand and one reasons
to enter a trade, but once the money is on the table, none of those
reasons matter. This was an important lesson in my evolution as a
trader. Unfortunately, the preponderance of books, articles, blogs, andpseudo mentors usually focus primarily on your entry criteria. It’s sexy
and it sells; risk management is not. If you read interviews of great
traders and investors, you will hear everyone talk about risk and not
some fancy entry rules. Warren Buffett: “Rule number 1: Never lose
money. Rule number 2: Never forget rule number 1.” George Soros:
“My approach works not by making valid predictions but by allowing
me to correct false ones.” Bruce Kovner: “In real estate, it’s location,
location, location. In money management, it’s risk management, riskmanagement, risk management.” Get the point?
2.Understand behavioral ﬁnance and especially biases about money.
Although understanding some of the biases involved in a trading de-cision will not guarantee you will avoid these pitfalls, being cognizant
that they exist is the best hedge available. Even quantitative traders can
beneﬁt greatly from understanding behavioral ﬁnance. One such beneﬁt88 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
is idea generation, as investor psychology can create inefﬁciencies. An-
other beneﬁt is to help traders understand their own inherent biasesin system testing such as excessive curve ﬁtting, constant interference
with executions, ﬁddling with or changing parameters, or marrying a
strategy. Quant trading eliminates one set of biases for a complete set
of new ones.
3.Try to maintain a trading log as detailed as possible, especially when
starting a new strategy. If at all possible, paper-trade for a while. Thislog will be very important once you start comparing real-time statistics
to historical or back-tested results. Additionally, a trading log will force
you to look closely at individual trades. When trading a strategy, it isimportant to understand how and why your edge exists and to learn
from experience when it works and when it doesn’t.
4.To quantitative traders, ﬁt the security to the model, not the model
to the security. You will be glad you did. In other words, if you are
researching mean-reversion trading, look at securities with a mean-reversion tendency. Similarly with trend following: QCOM will behave
very differently from BIDU. This should free up some time to work on
your portfolio allocation, which is far more important anyway.
Richard Wilson: What types of risk management tools have you found most
effective while trading?
Nakul Nayyar: I would name three tools as most effective in risk manage-
ment:
1.Options are securities designed for risk management. The interesting
thing about options is the ability to design a risk-to-reward criterionbefore the trade is made. I have met many traders who utilize options
as a leverage tool and not as risk management. Though it is one of the
uses, I believe that notion is misplaced.
2.A complete trading plan with levels of entry, exits, contingencies, and
so on, is an effective risk management tool that many either get com-placent or too lazy to follow through on. When something is in writing
it is much more difﬁcult to rationalize away our initial ideas on the
trade.
3.Having someone else, a competent risk manager perhaps or co-worker,
review and monitor positions can be highly beneﬁcial. We are con-
stantly ﬁghting our biases in this game and a fresh pair of eyes andopinions can allow the trader to reanalyze the situation. Oftentimes a
trader will go for a walk, step away from it for a while, which allows
them to regain perspective.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 89
Richard Wilson: How do you see hedge fund trading and the industry chang-
ing over the next few years? Do you see the use of models and black boxtrading fading away or remaining strong in certain parts of the industry?
Or maybe the industry is trading in more international markets than ever
before? What trends are you seeing from your perspective?
Nakul Nayyar: I can name three basic trends:
1.In the quantitative trading space, I see a commoditization of the ultra-
high-frequency space. It has been termed an “arms” race and, as such,
that space will soon be dominated by the largest, most capitalized play-ers. For example, at one point, triangular arbitrage was a strategy that
once was lucrative but now is no longer a viable strategy for a majority
of market players. It is obviously still being done, but participants willbe forced to move further out of the risk curve and place more focus
on forecasting over arbitrage.
2.There is also a very clear bifurcation in the hedge fund space based
on liquidity of the strategy. Hedge funds will focus more on exchange-
traded and liquid products, and those strategies that trade in illiquidor hard-to-value assets will likely choose a private equity formation.
3.Obviously there is more emphasis on transparency and investors’ access
to their capital, so operational requirements will become a vital partof a hedge fund business. Many hedge funds, especially start-ups, will
look for more turnkey approaches or, more appropriately, a managed
account structure.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter contains a great deal of advice, stories, and tips on how to bothstart a hedge fund and grow an emerging hedge fund. If you are looking
to someday start a hedge fund, or are in charge of marketing an emerging
hedge fund manager, this chapter may have been the most valuable one foryou within this book. Some of the key lessons included in this chapter:
/squaresolidMost hedge funds need at least three to ﬁve years to raise enough capitalto create a sustainable business.
/squaresolidComplete thorough due diligence on your service providers; have at
least a short two- to three-page request for proposal (RFP) for them to
complete while you are deciding who to work with going forward.
/squaresolidInvest in yourself, your processes, infrastructure, service providers,
hedge fund training, and relationships. Others prefer to invest with
you or after you, not before you have built a strong business system.90 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
/squaresolidWhile creating your pitch book think long-term, stress your unique
selling proposition (USP), use service providers and compliance advisersto improve the presentation, stress your team, and use a graphic designer
or sales copy writer if you don’t have those skills in-house.
/squaresolidSyed Ali offers advice for emerging hedge fund managers: Watch draw-
downs, don’t overcorrect, and be very patient while building your track
record.
/squaresolidNakul Nayyar recommends that emerging hedge fund managers should
be unafraid to start small, have systematic risk management in place,
create a complete trading plan, always maintain a trading log, and
understand behavioral ﬁnance.
Free Resource : Learn more about hedge fund start-ups at HedgeFund
StartupGuru.com.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: Nakul Nayyar suggests that you create a detailed trading
plan so that you can take more aggressive positions within the portfolioand have those moves documented on paper within the ﬁrm.
2.True or false: Having someone else review your trades, look at your risk
levels, and analyze your positions can be beneﬁcial. This can bring newperspective to everything that is going on within the portfolio.
3.Above everything else,
is most important, even more im-
portant than for trades.
a.Risk management, entry points.
b.Entry points, risk management.
c.Trading logs being updated, risk management.
d.Trading logs being updated, trading plans.
4.Within this chapter it is suggested that should be the focus
above all else while marketing a fund.
a.Transparency.
b.Operations.
c.Differentiation.
d.Outsourcing.
5.True or false: One difference between prop traders and hedge fund
managers is that prop traders are allowed large latitudes in terms of
strategy, whereas a hedge fund trader may be constrained to a speciﬁc
approach of asset class.Hedge Fund Start-Up Guru 91
6.True or false: Syed Ali believes that putting your fund into as many
hedge fund research databases as possible is a bad idea and can hurt thebrand of your hedge fund for two main reasons.
7.The two main challenges that Syed Ali and many emerging hedge fund
managers face is moving up the learning curve on all of the legal and
industry terms in the industry. The other main challenge is moving from
a
to a .
a.Small start-up hedge fund, fund of hedge fund business.
b.Small start-up hedge fund, $10 billion-plus fund within two years.
c.Small start-up hedge fund, service provider to other hedge funds.
d.Small start-up hedge fund, more established hedge fund business with
proper infrastructure in place.
8.Which of the following is notsuggested as a way to both address fraud
risk and lower investor fears of this type of risk:
a.Create an independent board of advisers.
b.Employ trusted service providers and business providers.
c.Ensure you employ a high-pedigree, experienced team.
d.Have respected ofﬁce space in either New York City or London.
9.True or false: Within this chapter we suggest to forget building relation-
ships until you have a solid track record, team, and a great infrastructure
in place—otherwise you will end up wasting your time and resources.
10.It is recommended that you do not show an investor your marketing
documents or information on your fund until it has been reviewed at
least times by your team of service providers.
a.3
b.5
c.10
d.15
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Answers.CHAPTER 6
Dedicated to Due Diligence
It is the studying that you do after your school days that really
counts. Otherwise, you know only that which everyone else
knows.
—Henry Doherty
(This chapter was written by Gregory Schink, a wealth management
professional who helped lead the efforts to create the CHP Designation
Level 2 Program on due diligence.)
From the late 1990s through the third quarter of 2007, investors felt an
overwhelming conﬁdence in the validity of the investments they were select-
ing, and more especially the managers who ran them. Bernard L. Madoff
Investment Securities had been brought up to the SEC for possible violations
since as early as 1999. The SEC was alerted to possible fraud concerning Sir
Allen Stanford as early as 2002. The credit crunch of 2007 was what ﬁnally
brought these frauds to light.
The possibility of fraud going undetected on such a massive scale has
caused a revolution in how in-depth due diligence will go when investigatinga hedge fund and its manager(s) for potential investors. The days of run-
and-gun investing when investors were chasing the highest returns possible
(think Long Term Capital Management) are gone. Hedge funds must becrystal clear on their backgrounds, the processes they use, and the style they
intend to implement. This is helping bring hedge funds more into the main-
stream and change the public’s opinion of how secretive they have appeared
in the past, as well as making quality due diligence a must for high net worth
(HNW) investors looking to invest in the hedge fund arena.
Why important : Due to recent scandals, media attention, fraud, and
insider trading cases, due diligence is one of the most important topics in theindustry. This is because due diligence is the forum through which fund
93The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 94 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
managers may communicate their transparency, proactive institutional-
quality operations, and robust investment process. It is also important be-cause it is the method through which accredited and institutional investors
attempt to avoid funds that may be more likely to be involved in scandals,
fraud, blowups, or insider trading cases. If you are not aware of best prac-
tices and trends in the due diligence space, you may miss opportunities to
manage risk or obtain additional capital.
In this chapter, the interviews Gregory completed with two prominent
experts in the due diligence arena and Richard Wilson consisted of a series
of questions to gain a further understanding of their experience in the due
diligence ﬁeld. The questions include personal background questions suchas what is the preferred background for someone who wishes to start a
profession in the due diligence arena concerning hedge funds; and what’s
the best advice you can give to someone starting out in due diligence. We
also examine some due diligence best practice tips that each interviewee has,
such as some telltale signs of a shady manager/fund, and what resourcesa hedge fund manager should have in place in order to efﬁciently move
through a due diligence questionnaire (DDQ) process more efﬁciently.
Through each interview, we present three different backgrounds, opin-
ions, and approaches to successful due diligence. Each individual has his
own method of performing successful due diligence, but there are underly-
ing similarities that are consistent across the due diligence domain that must
be highlighted.
SCOTT FREUND, PRESIDENT, GCC FAMILY
WEALTH MANAGEMENT
For this chapter’s ﬁrst interview, I spoke with Scott Freund, president of
GCC Family Wealth Management. Scott graduated with a bachelor of sci-
ence degree in mechanical engineering from Virginia Tech in 1991. Scott’s
investment background began with a boutique investment bank in Bethesda,
Maryland, in 1994, and then in 1996 he moved to the private client group
at Wheat First Butcher Singer (now Wachovia Securities). In 1999, Scott be-
came a senior consultant with the Investment Consulting Services Group of
Morgan Stanley. He was one of the ﬁrst advisers at Morgan Stanley to earnthe Certiﬁed Investment Management Analyst (CIMA) designation, and was
also a Rule 144 specialist.
Scott joined the Private Bank at Bank of America in 2003 as a senior
vice president and private client adviser, dealing not only with individuals
and families, but with family ofﬁces as well. Working with the gatekeepers
of these family ofﬁces served as a stepping-stone for the foundation, in JulyDedicated to Due Diligence 95
2005 in Bethesda, Maryland, of Family Ofﬁce Research, a multifamily ofﬁce
founded to provide objective advice as well as a higher level of customizationand customer service for high net worth clients.
GCC Family Wealth Management was formed as a result of a merger
with Family Ofﬁce Research. It is a multifamily ofﬁce designed to manage the
complex wealth of a limited number of high net worth individuals, families,
and foundations. GCC Family Wealth Management is a collaboration of ex-
pertise from different wealth management disciplines, including investmentmanagement, private banking, estate planning, insurance advisory, and risk
management.
Scott Freund’s recommendation for someone pursuing a job in the due
diligence ﬁeld is to gain knowledge in the legal, accounting, or investment
arenas. He believes that good due diligence requires a very thorough indi-
vidual who takes nothing at face value, and he implements the “don’t trust
and deﬁnitely verify” philosophy into his practice. He also thinks that due
diligence is better performed by a ﬁduciary adviser as opposed to an adviserwho works on a commission basis.
On average, Scott spends three to six months on a due diligence report
for a single fund. It’s mandatory to have background checks done on allprincipals involved in the fund during this stage. Some telltale signs that
something may be amiss are if a manager is too quick to close or if he says
they “need the money right away.” On the ﬂip side, trustworthy managers
are always willing to let you speak with their auditors, attorneys, and share-
holders and will encourage you to do so. Scott believes in the importance of
checking on the status of the board of directors of each fund. This includesgetting the telephone numbers of each member and verifying that each one
of them is still associated, is proud to continue that association, and whether
they are getting compensated in any way for being on the board of directorsfor the said fund.
One of the best standard due diligence questionnaires (DDQs) available
comes from the Investment Management Consultants Association (IMCA).
Scott believes that if fund managers would provide a DDQ (see Appendix B)
and background checks to the due diligence team, it would streamline theentire process; they’re going to ﬁnd out, regardless.
BRIAN REICH, PRESIDENT AND FOUNDER, ATRATO
ADVISORS LLC
For our second interview with a due diligence expert, I spoke with Brian
Reich, president and founder of Atrato Advisors LLC. Brian holds a bache-
lor of science degree from Cornell University (1996) and a master’s degree96 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
in business administration (2001) from the Stern School of Business at New
York University. Prior to business school, Brian worked as a strategy con-sultant focused on the health care sector. He began his investment career at
Salomon Smith Barney in the Derivatives Capital Markets Group. He then
served as a senior research analyst and Investment Committee member at
Richcourt Fund Advisors, the fund-of-funds business previously owned by
the Citco Group.
Later, Brian was named the director and global head of hedge fund
research for Deutsche Bank’s private wealth management division. At
Deutsche Bank, Brian oversaw the construction, development, and man-
ager selection for the bank’s global open-architecture hedge fund advisorypractice, and supervised a team of analysts in the United States, Europe, and
Asia. Most recently, Brian was director of hedge fund research for Cantor
Advisors LP, the asset management division of Cantor Fitzgerald & Com-
pany. He joined Cantor to start up and establish a hedge fund investment
practice, and to build and develop an institutional research process and itssupporting team.
Atrato Advisors was founded by Brian in October 2008 to meet the
rising demand for professional and individualized research, advice, andstrategic direction in the alternative investment arena. Atrato is a boutique
specializing in hedge fund research and portfolio management advisory ser-
vices that works with direct allocators to hedge funds as an independent
and objective provider of research, risk management, and portfolio advisory
services.
Brian believes that although there are many backgrounds that are ap-
propriate and relevant for those wishing to do hedge fund research, one’s
prior experience should have some relevant strengths in the various aspects
of due diligence. Prior experience in trading, investment research, account-ing, operations, journalism, quantitative analysis, and risk management are
all background jobs that Brian ﬁnds complementary to hedge fund due
diligence. He points out that the ability to be versatile across all of these
areas is a positive for someone wishing to do hedge fund due diligence as
a career.
This leads to Brian’s advice for anyone considering hedge fund due
diligence: Become a good “all-around athlete.” There are quantitative, qual-
itative, investigative, and instinctual skills that one needs to have to be agood analyst. The ability to communicate and craft well-thought-out argu-
ments to invest or not to invest is also a key aspect of the position. Brian
believes that if you’re good or excel at one thing, you should work on gettingstronger in other areas where you are not as experienced.
Brian says that he enjoys the challenge of trying to ﬁnd the one piece or
several pieces of information that are ultimately going to drive his investmentDedicated to Due Diligence 97
decision the most. In nearly all cases, in doing fund research, the client is
sitting across the table from a manager who is trying to paint the prettiestpossible picture, and it’s always in the portfolio manager’s best interest
to highlight the positives and downplay negatives. Brian looks forward to
probing around each aspect of the organization, not knowing where he’s
going to ﬁnd that crucial and possibly hidden data point.
The time Brian spends on due diligence for a hedge fund varies greatly,
but on average it takes about three to four months. The biggest lesson Brianhas learned is to share information with peers and competitors. He thinks
it is virtually impossible to know everything about a fund manager or his
business. There are lots of smart, talented researchers out there who may takea different perspective or focus on different factors than he does, and that’s
who he wants to communicate with. He feels that if sharing information
with a competitor can help protect their client by bringing to their attention
a relevant piece of information, then he is acting in the best possible ﬁduciary
manner.
When watching out for a shady manager, Brian points out that there
are the usual obvious signs such as questionable business structures, obscure
service provider relationships, and evasiveness in the due diligence process.Brian believes that some of the more subtle things are important to look
out, for such as risk-taking behavior and tendencies. Identifying patterns of
behavior either in trading record or career progression is a softer way of
trying to ﬁgure out what a portfolio manager is most likely to do when his
back is against the wall. As part of their operational due diligence, Atrato
also veriﬁes the existence and roles of the speciﬁc board members throughonshore and offshore counsel.
Brian ﬁnds that trustworthy managers always have the most trans-
parency. The more a manager is willing to show an investor (and to helpwith the veriﬁcation of his veracity), the better. Although it may sound coun-
terintuitive, Brian points out that bad performance can actually be a sign
of honest management. If an investor has good information about a fund’s
exposures and portfolio holdings, it’s usually pretty easy to predict how
that manager would have performed in the past. If, based on an analysis ofa fund manager’s portfolio, you would expect him to do poorly during a
certain time period and he actually didn’t , then a red ﬂag should go up.
Brian doesn’t believe in administering a boilerplate DDQ. He ﬁnds that
using such questionnaires greatly limits the creativity one needs to carefully
and effectively analyze an investment opportunity, and it allows the fund
manager to predict and carefully massage crafted messages. Most managersproduce a similarly formatted Alternative Investment Management Associa-
tion (AIMA) type questionnaire anyway. The AIMA standard questionnaire
is already the most used tool throughout the industry. More candid answers98 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
are generated throughout the dialogue with a manager when the conversa-
tion is less structured and more free-ﬂowing. A competent and experiencedCFO and COO also help the process ﬂow more smoothly.
On the operational side, getting the right infrastructure and service
providers and internal operational staff is the key to early success. This also
means the manager is investing in his fund early on, but he’ll raise money
quickly and generally be rewarded in the long run. Brian points out that
most hedge fund managers are hardworking, smart people who are tryingto do right by their investors.
As a case study, Brian gave us the facts on a 2002 interview with a
fund manager who traded a discretionary global macro strategy. The fundmanager had pedigree from one of the largest multistrategy hedge funds in
the world at the time, and was allowed to show his track record going back
to the mid-1990s for proﬁt and loss (P&L) that he managed while employed
at his previous ﬁrm. There was one notable omission from his track record,
as he did not post a performance number for August and September 1998. Ofcourse, this was a crucial stress test for a hedge fund manager, particularly
trading a macro strategy, as this was the time of the Russia default and
the LTCM collapse. When pressed on this, he claimed that he had closedall his positions prior to August and had coincidentally “sat out” those
crucial months. Unsatisﬁed, Brian pressed further in complete disbelief of
this assertion. The portfolio manager became enraged and stormed out of
the meeting. Brian states, “I’ll never know if he was telling the truth or not,
but the fury by which he ended the meeting (something I had never seen
before nor have I seen again) was enough to paint a picture of a highlyvolatile persona and one whom I didn’t want managing our money.”
Obviously, Brian and Scott have a different approach to hedge fund due
diligence. The most notable difference is the use of a standardized DDQ ver-sus the aversion to one. Brian and Scott are both of the opinion that verifying
the validity of the board of directors of each fund is of the utmost impor-
tance, and that a telltale sign of a good manager is being transparent and
forthright with information about himself, his fund, and his background.
They both also stress that the real due diligence comes from the interviewsand information received, however that information is collected.
RICHARD WILSON, HEDGE FUND GROUP,
CHP DESIGNATION, HEDGEFUNDBLOGGER.COM
For this chapter’s ﬁnal interview, Gregory Schink interviewed Richard
Wilson about his experience in the hedge fund world and his experienceDedicated to Due Diligence 99
and advice concerning hedge fund due diligence. Richard has a background
in capital raising and risk management. He holds a bachelor’s degree in busi-ness administration from Oregon State University and an MBA in marketing
from the University of Portland. Directly out of college, he helped raise cap-
ital for an investment bank and a start-up tech ﬁrm and then went into risk
management consulting and process design advisory work. While he feels
that the consulting gave him a unique perspective, he missed the challenge
and marketing aspect of raising capital.
Richard moved back into a capital-raising role as a third party marketer
for hedge funds, funds of hedge funds, and large asset optimization shops.
This position allowed him to help roll out new products and raise capital forexisting portfolios. Richard eventually was able to help raise over $225 mil-
lion in this ﬁrst third party marketing role and has helped raise another
$100 million-plus since. While Richard didn’t see as many fund managers
each year as an institutional investor may, he received several inquiries each
day and quickly learned why investors must cut most managers out of therunning, based simply on objective criteria such as assets under management
(AUM); there is just not enough time to really look into every manager who
comes toward you with a pitch book and one-pager. Richard’s most recentrole has been running the Hedge Fund Group, CHP Designation, Hedge-
FundBlogger.com, and working on related capital-raising training programs,
directories, and resources for fund managers.
Our interview went on to probe into what Richard thought were some
of the biggest problems in hedge fund due diligence as well as what he
thought was useful advice for this ﬁeld. Poor marketing materials are one ofthe things that stand out right away to Richard as an area that could use
improvement. He believes that many managers with less than $1 billion in
AUM have poor marketing systems, sales pipeline development processes,investor relationship management tools, and educational materials. Most
professionals who start hedge funds are experts at their domains of trading
and portfolio management but have close to no experience in marketing,
sales, and capital raising. This can give the wrong message to investors
while they complete their due diligence. Richard warned that if the principalof the fund hasn’t been coached, if the marketing materials don’t clearly
articulate the investment process, and if the team doesn’t have resources
in place to manage the ongoing relationship, it can end the due diligenceprocess or even prevent it from ever starting.
Due diligence calls are another area of improvement for hedge fund
managers to work on. Completing due diligence calls is an art in itself.Richard thinks that most managers underestimate the importance of what
you say and how you say it during these phone calls. Many institutional100 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
investors and almost all institutional consultants now have databases where
they record and maintain records on every manager they speak to across thecompany. If you blow one single phone call with a consultant who advises
$500 billion in assets, it could take three to four more phone calls to calm
their fears about one issue which could have been misinterpreted in the last
phone call you had with them.
Richard’s tips for avoiding pain in this area would be to work on possible
answers to questions ahead of time and determine how you will reply toimportant questions regarding portfolio position sizes, risk management,
your investment process, and so on. Coordinating who will speak over
the phone, practicing your lines, becoming comfortable explaining yourinvestment perspective verbally, and thinking about all of the different ways
your words can be interpreted are key aspects of being prepared for a phone
interview. If you say something like, “In this market, position sizes mean
nothing,” that can be taken to mean that you don’t keep a consistent position
size through varying markets or that you are taking a large amount of risk inthe portfolio. Richard warns that everything you say can have two to three
meanings and that you should make sure you control that and clarify the
meaning for yourself or after others have spoken on your team.
Richard believes organization is another area that is often overlooked
by hedge fund managers when it comes to due diligence—having everything
ready to send to potential investors before they ask for compliance reports,
positions, holdings, sample portfolio weights, historic team adjustments, full
bios on team members, audit reports, and the necessary legal documents.
Richard warns not to wait until a family ofﬁce decides not to invest in yourﬁrm because you can’t produce one of these reports. Be highly organized
and efﬁcient when it comes to marketing and you will come off as having
been proactive in managing risk, wise in your choice of service providers,and professional in running your business.
Richard always try to advise funds on building their own internal mar-
keting resources because no third-party marketer will ever care more than
the actual manager about raising capital for his own fund. Richard thinks it is
smart to use third-party marketing services in the appropriate circumstancesbut that it shouldn’t be the resource that a hedge fund bets its business on.
Managers must raise capital on their own as well and move up the learning
curve on what it takes to manage a third-party marketer.
Richard also went on to explain some of the most useful tips he com-
monly sees in hedge fund due diligence. Richard notes that the very best
funds have preparation and constant improvement. These funds are alwaysaware of who is going to talk, what will be covered, and what could be
improved before and after each due diligence phone call that occurs. These
can be intense and lengthy calls, and it will help improve your performanceDedicated to Due Diligence 101
if you take notes on what is said during the call or ask the consultants for
permission to record them for later review.
Questions will be asked that are speciﬁc to each fund’s performance and
background. The answers to these are very important, such as explaining
the fund’s quarter 3 (Q3) performance back in 2006, or why its position size
changed from 2007 to 2008, or why the chief investment ofﬁcer left the ﬁrm
after ﬁve years of running the portfolio. These questions must be answered
carefully, yet a manager does not want to bring up all these issues in thePowerPoint presentation or it would be more than 100 pages long. The
solution that Richard has found works best is typing up speciﬁc answers in
one- to three-page Word documents that are complete, accurate, and detailedresponses to these tough questions that due diligence will uncover regarding
the speciﬁc fund and personnel. This allows the manager to either read
from the typed responses over the phone or e-mail the consultant the one-
page explanation regarding that topic, allowing professionals to review the
detailed answer and evidence and then ask any follow-up questions that mayarise. This strategy helps the manager demonstrate that he is well organized,
prepared, and knowledgeable about the perceived risks of his fund.
Having a lot of clarity is also key. Richard advises managers to know
the ﬁve points they really want to drive home during the due diligence
process about their speciﬁc fund. How are you positioning your fund and in
what tangible ways is your fund different? Simply saying that your returns
are uncorrelated with the stock market and you can make money in any
market condition is not tangible or unique but heard every hour in the
industry.
Richard has completed due diligence on hundreds of hedge fund man-
agers from the perspective of a marketer but never as an analyst or fund of
funds due diligence professional. Typically throughout the industry, though,he thinks the worst type of due diligence process is one that not only uses
an AUM ﬁgure as a ﬁrst-pass cutting tool but then also skips through most
of the other steps needed to allocate funds. This practice is rampant and
bad for investors, bad for the industry, and bad for small, innovative hedge
fund managers. It slows down the natural process of evolution in the in-dustry and provides the largest of investors with less appealing long-term
returns. The best due diligence Richard has seen is by ﬁrms that take on a
very limited set of clients each year so they can dedicate adequate resourcestoward each fund they analyze. It takes time to look at portfolio returns and
DDQs, complete on-site visits, and check Web databases on performance.
Richard feels that the biggest difference between those who do due diligenceright and those who do it wrong are poor talent and resources compared to
great experience combined with consistent, detailed-oriented process-driven
approaches.102 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
DUE DILIGENCE EFFECTS ON HEDGE FUNDS
To understand due diligence and how it affects a hedge fund, one must look
into what can happen when due diligence is lacking or not up to par. Let’s
examine three infamous examples of hedge funds blowing up and point out
some examples of how good due diligence could have protected investors
from mistake and/or fraud. The examples used here are Long Term Capital
Management, Bayou Hedge Fund, and Bernie Madoff Investment Securities.
Long Term Capital Mangement
Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) was a U.S. hedge fund founded in1994 by John Meriwether, the former vice chairman and head of bond
trading at Salomon Brothers. The fund’s trading strategies were basedupon various arbitrage designs combined with high amounts of leverage.
Meriwether approached various business owners, celebrities, and university
endowments, but most of the seed money came from companies and indi-
viduals connected to the ﬁnancial industry. When LTCM began trading, the
company had amassed just over $1.01 billion in capital.
1
LTCM used mathematical models to ﬁnd ﬁxed-income arbitrage oppor-
tunities in various government bonds. The managers were making successful
trades betting on convergence strategies in these bonds and had amassed an-nualized returns of over 40 percent in their ﬁrst few years. As their success
grew, so did their assets under management; at the beginning of 1998, the
ﬁrm had equity of $4.72 billion.
This increasing capital base and unheard-of performance put pressure
on LTCM managers to continue to invest the assets they were acquiring,
only they had run out of good ﬁxed-income arbitrage plays. LTCM thenmoved away from the ﬁxed-income arbitrage that had worked so well for it
and strayed into merger arbitrage, equity options, interest rate derivatives,
and interest rate sweeps.
By the time LTCM had started to invest in the more exotic derivatives,
its AUM was $4.72 billion but it had borrowed over $124.5 billion with
assets of around $129 billion, for a debt-to-equity ratio of about 25 to 1.LTCM had off-balance-sheet derivative positions with a notional value of
approximately $1.25 trillion.
The Russian ﬁnancial crisis that started in August 1998 triggered a
ﬂight from foreign bonds to U.S. treasuries, which destroyed LTCM’s
1Nicholas Dunbar, Inventing Money: The Story of Long-Term Capital Management
and the Legends Behind It (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000).Dedicated to Due Diligence 103
ﬁxed-income arbitrage play and caused huge losses of over $1.5 billion.
This caused investors to move for liquidity in their LTCM positions, andthe AUM of LTCM plummeted from $2.3 billion to $400 million in under
a month. This translated to a leverage ratio of over 250 to 1 at the end of
September 1998. The fund was eventually liquidated by 2000.
LTCM teaches us an important fact about hedge fund due diligence:
Know and verify that the hedge fund manager will stay in his designated
style. When investing in various hedge funds for diversiﬁcation across styles,investors are trusting that managers will not stray from their designated
styles to chase the money. As LTCM had success and grew larger, its man-
agers felt more pressure to continue to deliver returns greater than 40 per-cent. As the good ﬁxed-income arbitrage dried up, they moved into deriva-
tives to ﬁll the void and maintain the momentum that investors had come to
expect out of the fund. Had LTCM stuck with what it had excelled at from
the beginning, ﬁxed-income arbitrage, and realized that every year wasn’t
going to yield a 40 percent yield, it would have been in much better shapeto weather the Russian ﬁnancial crisis of 1998.
Bayou Hedge Fund Group
Another example of hedge fund due diligence gone bad was the BayouHedge Fund Group. This was a conglomerate of companies and hedge funds
founded by Samuel Israel III in 1996. The group raised $450 million from
investors.
A very simple background check of Mr. Israel would have shown that
he had a National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) membership
violation in accordance with Series 55 requirements and was censured andﬁned $8,500. This should have been a huge red ﬂag, and an easy one to
uncover at that. Mr. Israel also claimed that he attended Tulane University,
but a simple call to the registrar conﬁrms that he was placed on academic
suspension and subsequently left school without receiving a degree. The
term attended does not mean he received his degree, but the fact that he
does not have an undergraduate degree should have raised a warning ﬂag at
the very least. Lastly, a criminal background check would have found that
Mr. Israel was convicted of a DUI and possession of marijuana at the ageof 43. Although a DUI is not necessarily a deal breaker, the fact that he was
43 years old when it happened and was also found to be carrying marijuana
at the time is a sign of a poor sense of moral character and judgment. Oneof these ﬁndings alone could easily be dismissed, but the combination of all
three indicates a much deeper personality ﬂaw and should have stopped any
investor from placing trust with Mr. Israel.104 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
This is a prime example of where hedge fund due diligence had not
included a thorough manager background check. Mr. Israel’s statementsand actual background showed vast discrepancies. A thorough background
check compared to the statements Mr. Israel provided would have raised
the ﬁrst red ﬂag. Another red ﬂag would have come up due to some of the
events that had occurred in Mr. Israel’s life (i.e., the DUI). A hedge fund
manager holds a great amount of responsibility and therefore should have
displayed virtuous traits throughout his personal and professional life priorto becoming a hedge fund manager.
Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities
The most prominent example of due diligence gone awry is Bernie Madoff.Madoff’s strategy was much more in-depth than the usual fraud, and to
understand it, one must understand how he got started and his background.
Madoff founded the ﬁrm Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities LLC
in 1960 with money he earned working as a lifeguard and sprinkler installer.
The ﬁrm specialized in trading penny stocks, and the technology the ﬁrm
developed eventually became the NASDAQ. The ﬁrm began to function as athird market provider, which bypassed exchange specialist ﬁrms by directly
executing orders over the counter from retail brokers.
Madoff used this function as a way to defer any electronic record of
transactions he supposedly was making for his clients. By trading all of his
options over the counter, he could give the image that he was bypassing
exchange specialist ﬁrms and making trades directly through retail brokers,
and thereby eliminate any paper trail of those trades.
Although this would make only a savvy investor suspicious of Madoff’s
trades, one aspect that should have thrown up a red ﬂag from the be-ginning was clients’ lack of electronic access to the accounts. The only
proof of their holdings was the paper statements they received monthly in
the mail.
There are many highly respected third-party administrators, prime bro-
kers, and audit ﬁrms. Madoff had dealings with none of these and was incharge of doing custody, trading, and administration of every investment in
his fund. He also turned down the opportunity to have managed accounts
with clients, even to the detriment of losing billions of dollars of investments,because of it. This furthered the lack of transparency of his actual underlying
investments.
Madoff had actually served as the chairman of the board of directors
and on the board of governors of the NASD, and maybe his past credentials
had lured more people into his investments.Dedicated to Due Diligence 105
The part of due diligence that is highlighted by the entire Madoff fraud
is transparency, or the lack thereof. Obviously there are in-house tradingmethods, black-box algorithms, and proprietary secrets that each manager
must keep secret to ensure his edge in the hedge fund industry, but electronic
documentation of the underlying funds held by the fund does not necessarily
give away those strategies. Proper due diligence on Madoff’s fund should
have raised red ﬂags due to the fact that he was in control of every aspect of
the investment process, didn’t have a respectable auditor, and would provideno proof of any underlying investment.
2
In an interesting side note, about half of Madoff’s investors were net
winners even after his fund blew up, meaning they had earned/withdrawnmore than their initial investment.
3
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter provides information on recent hedge fund due diligence trends
as well as two interviews with due diligence experts, one from within a family
ofﬁce and the other at an institutional consulting ﬁrm. Some key lessons fromthis chapter include the following:
/squaresolidIf you are looking to work in the hedge fund due diligence space ScottFreund suggests gaining experience in legal, accounting, and various in-
vestment arenas. Brian Reich suggests also being an “all around athlete”
in many different disciplines.
/squaresolidGood due diligence takes a very thorough professional who works onthe “trust but verify” basis who takes nothing at face value.
/squaresolidYou can often tell a lot just by how open a hedge fund is to letting
you speak to their board of advisers, auditors, prime brokers, or other
service providers.
/squaresolidDue diligence on a hedge fund can sometimes take more than six months
but often lasts just two to four months.
/squaresolidWhile hedge fund managers are often experts in trading, risk manage-
ment and portfolio management few are trained in marketing, sales, or
managing due diligence processes and this leads to problems.
2Maureen O’Hara, Market Microstructure Theory (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995), 190.
ISBN 1-55786-443-8.
3Ibid.106 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.This chapter stresses that the main lesson to take away from Long Term
Capital Management is that
a.It is important that a hedge fund manager stay within his designated
style , or investment mandate scope.
b.Foreign exchange investing inside of hedge funds can be very risky
when those bets are made using only a single prime brokerage ﬁrm.
c.Even well-respected hedge funds can blow up.
2.This chapter indicates that is bad for investors, bad for the
industry, and particularly bad for emerging hedge fund managers.
a.Too much transparency.
b.Too much compliance reporting.
c.Eliminating hedge funds from due diligence processes mostly based
on AUM.
d.Eliminating hedge funds from due diligence processes mostly based
on background checks.
3.True or false: In this chapter it is suggested that you take every piece
of feedback from investors, and each question they ask, and work the
detailed answers into your PowerPoint presentation so that you come offas 100 percent prepared and well established to all investors.
4.True or false: It is best to remain highly ﬂexible during hedge fund
due diligence calls while presenting your strategy and team—this way
your team can adapt on the ﬂy to whoever on the team feels like taking
the lead in presenting the details of your investment process and risk
management tools to the ﬁrm completing the due diligence.
5.Typically, many hedge fund managers
how important hedge
fund due diligence calls are with potential investors.
a.Underestimate
b.Overestimate
6.True or false: Hedge fund due diligence takes in-depth quantitative and
qualitative analysis skills to ﬁgure out what is missing or is not being
said, and some of this comes with experience.
7.Brian Reich has found that managers have the most trans-
parency.
a.Small hedge fund.
b.Large hedge fund.
c.Trustworthy.
d.Fast-growing.
8.Which of the following is not suggested as a way to identify potential
problems that exist within the hedge fund during a due diligence process?Dedicated to Due Diligence 107
a.Evasive behavior.
b.Questionable business structures.
c.Small portfolio management teams.
d.Obscure service provider relationships.
9.According to the interviews in this chapter, the hedge fund due diligence
process takes months to be completed.
a.2t o4
b.8t o1 2
c.18 to 24
d.4t o1 2
10. True or false: Hedge fund due diligence professionals always use boiler-
plate due diligence questionnaires, so once you have completed one of
these you will be able to simply use that for all future inquiries.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
dHedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 7
Giant Hedge Funds
On the mountains of truth you can never climb in vain: Either you
will reach a point higher up today, or you will be training your
powers so that you will be able to climb higher tomorrow.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
While most hedge funds are small in size it is typically the largest of hedge
funds which are most secretive. These hedge funds have assets, secrets,
and processes to protect from hungry competitors. This chapter providesa unique insight to some of the marketing, operational, and investing bestpractices of hedge funds with $1 billion or more in assets under management.
Why important : If you are trying to grow a hedge fund it can help to see
what the hedge funds who are receiving most of the new incoming capitalare doing. In this chapter we provide some clues and a peek behind the
curtain to what the largest of hedge funds are doing different from smaller
fund managers in the industry.
BEST PRACTICES FROM $1 BILLION-PLUS
HEDGE FUNDS
Following is a list of ten best practices that I have seen $1 billion-plus hedge
funds employing that are more often than not missing within small teams of
hedge fund professionals. Large well run hedge funds often have:
1.Better research processes in place, and these are constantly being im-
proved in many ways every quarter. They focus on Kazien—constant
improvement.
109The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 110 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.Documentation . Their compliance processes, operational procedures,
compliance checks, internal controls, hiring processes, and risk man-agement techniques are all documented in great detail to help ensure
consistent quality and improve what is being carried out.
3.International marketing and sales teams which cover institutional in-
vestors and consultants in at least Europe and the United States if not
also in Australia, South Africa, South America, and Asia.
4.Deep pedigree. With larger pocketbooks, the largest of hedge funds are
able to retain the most experienced experts not only as adjunct advisers
to the fund but full-time employees or consultants who provide daily or
weekly insights on upcoming investment opportunities.
5.Human resources strategies . Many small hedge funds do not have any
long-term talent development, or Star Employee hiring practices in place.
Larger hedge funds do and must keep their organization moving forward
and growing over the long term.
6.Master DDQs . Every large hedge fund I know of has a very thorough
master due diligence questionnaire that is constantly updated. The larger
the hedge fund the more likely it is that their investors will be asking for
a very thorough DDQ during the due diligence phase.
7.Superior marketing . Larger hedge funds have moved to the top of the
learning curve when it comes to ﬁguring out how to raise capital. They
use multi-modality marketing channels and materials and they have
relationship development processes and goals in place which match up
with the long-term growth goals of the fund. They are also more than
willing to invest in the best graphic designers and sales copy writerswho can provide another edge over those who skimp on their image
and marketing presence.
8.More in-house functions . While large hedge funds still use service
providers and rely upon business partners many of them have large
enough staffs and unique enough processes that some work such as
some investment research, operations, accounting, or marketing may be
done in-house instead of being outsourced to service providers such as
administrators or third party marketers.
9.More veriﬁcation points . The largest of hedge funds have been asked
500 times for their holdings, and 3,000 times for their PowerPoint
presentation. They have completed hundreds of due diligence processesand are use to working with consultants who need to check every fact,
assertion, and claim. They are used to operating within the world of
providing evidence for everything said, and because of this may quicklymeet the requests of investors who ask for such evidence.
10. Long-term strategies and goals . Most large hedge funds I know of plan
for the next three to ﬁve or ﬁve to seven years strategically in who theyGiant Hedge Funds 111
hire, market their fund to, and where they open ofﬁces. In contrast
most smaller hedge funds are very focused on day-to-day or month-to-month operations and most think in terms of one- to three-year plans.
When investors see the fund planning for investing in the long haul, it
shows, and that is part of why some larger hedge funds receive more
allocations than small ones. They have the infrastructure and mind-set
more in common with an institutional investor.
RICHARD ZAHM, PORTFOLIO MANAGER, SECOND
ANGEL FUND
Our ﬁrst interview in this chapter is with Richard Zahm, portfolio manager
of Second Angel Fund.
Richard Wilson: What type of hedge fund do you work for?
Richard Zahm: I’ve focused on asset-based lending (ABL) funds, speciﬁ-
cally bridge lending funds that provide short-term ﬁnancing secured bycommercial real estate.
Richard Wilson: Can you explain how that strategy relates to a more typical
long/short equity fund?
Richard Zahm: The strategies have all of the attributes that equity funds are
now faced with: transparency, compliance, coordination of lock periods
with speciﬁc investments/loans. Fund sizes range from start-ups to around$800 million. I’ve served as co-founder, portfolio manager, underwriter,
servicer, and CCO. The unique element of this type of investment is that it
crosses several disciplines and regulatory regimes: real estate, lending, andinvesting; state regulations with multiple agencies in each state, as well
as a federal overlay. The segment was noncorrelated, but now ﬁnds itself
subject to the backlash brought about by unrelated residential mortgages
and the credit crunch.
Richard Wilson: It sounds like you have worked in a variety of roles, in-
cluding both small funds and an $800 million fund. What would you say
is the number one difference between your hedge fund operations in the
$800 million fund and that of a sub–$100 million hedge fund ﬁrm? Whatreally makes your ﬁrm stand out in terms of operations, trading, or risk
management?
Richard Zahm: A smaller ABL fund contains fewer assets and, as a result,
there’s tighter focus by senior management as to what’s contained in the
portfolio. Personal contact with borrowers and investors is greater and
there’s a good sense of the details of each speciﬁc position. It’s a lot like112 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
being in a small boat: You’re aware of subtle shifts in everything around
you.
You’re also more exposed to changes in conditions than you are in a
larger vessel. A bigger fund provides more opportunity to diversify risk
across a greater number of investments. Performing loans in the fund
provide a cushion against delinquencies and defaults—that is, so long
as the diversiﬁcation model was maintained. However, there’s a strong
tendency for managers to follow a cookie-cutter approach, replicating pre-vious successful loans in terms of type, size, and location. The thinking is,
“It worked before, it’ll work again.” Although this approach solves the
immediate challenge of deploying additional investment dollars ﬂowinginto a fund, it actually works against the core strategy of diversifying loans
in a fund. Concentrations begin to appear. Portfolios become lumpy, ei-
ther by loan type or, worse, by loan size. As investment funds get larger,
it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to maintain lender discipline.
Richard Wilson: How can funds like yours ﬁght against this?Richard Zahm: The differentiator for us has been a combination of discipline
and size itself. We lend on what we know, and keep on top of the loans,
the borrowers, and the individual markets.
Richard Wilson: What advice would you offer to small to medium-size
hedge fund managers who have yet to bridge the gap between the $5 to
$100 million mark and the $1 billion-plus mark?
Richard Zahm: Focus on the additional requirements that larger institutional
investors have, while maintaining the practices that enable you to succeed
at a smaller size.
Richard Wilson: That’s a great piece of advice. I think many times managers
are hesitant to make large changes to their processes if they feel like it is
going to slow them down or get in the way of how they have operatedsuccessfully in the past. Do you have an example of this?
Richard Zahm: Compliance and due diligence material and documentation
might not seem relevant early on, but having the processes in place that
can prove performance are the costs of admission as the fund grows. It’s
a heavy burden for a small fund and it won’t always be attributable tooperations, but keep with it.
Richard Wilson: Great, thanks for that suggestion. This is valuable to just
about every emerging manager right now who is planning to keep up withfurther regulatory developments.
From the perspective of working in a very large hedge fund, what do
small hedge funds not realize, which you could share as a lesson, tip, orstrategy that would help them secure far more investments from institu-
tional investors than they may be receiving now?Giant Hedge Funds 113
Richard Zahm: From the start, identify which institutional lenders are even
in a position to invest in small funds. Many are proscribed from investingin funds below a certain size, or in making investments smaller than a
given amount that could represent too large a position in a fund. From
there, determine if there is a familiarity with the strategy the fund is using
and how there might be a ﬁt.
Richard Wilson: I think that hits on a very common frustration in the indus-
try: that smaller funds cannot become larger because most of the capitalis being sent to the funds that are already above a certain threshold, such
as $100 million. Any other advice in regard to marketing to institutional
investors?
Richard Zahm: Yes, also recognize the very, very slow pace that many
institutional investors often have. They’re under constraints themselves.
Provide information to them in the format they want.
Richard Wilson: Great. I think this is overlooked, and many managers can
spoil a potential partnership by checking in every three days regardingprogress or status of a potential allocation or due diligence questionnaire
(DDQ) process. In my experience, the sales cycle for a large institutional
investor is 12 to 16 months or more. You will be sending the wrong signalsand moving away from having a solid relationship with the potential
investor if you are a pest.
What group of institutional investors do you see as having a very strong
long-term interest in hedge funds, and where do you see some slack
in demand in terms of allocations to hedge funds over the next 5 to
10 years?
Richard Zahm: ABL funds will continue to attract investors seeking steady,
uncorrelated returns using a simple, transparent model. They will be ap-
pealing to more patient money allocations, taking on more of a hybridprivate equity (PE)/hedge fund structure.
Richard Wilson: So you believe that unique, transparent, simple models will
grow in assets much more quickly than competitors who work in a more
complex or black-box type environment?
Richard Zahm: Yes, I do.Richard Wilson: For those who want to grow to over $1 billion in assets
under management (AUM), what are your top ﬁve tips for hedge fund
managers who have less than $100 million in assets under managementbut would like to improve the institutional quality of their fund?
Richard Zahm: My advice would be to focus in on:
1.Transparency.
2.Prominence in the industry.114 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
3.Innovation.
4.Consistency.
5.Investor communications.
Richard Wilson: Very valuable—this whole book could be on those ﬁve ideas
only and be worth a lot to many fund managers today. We have touched
on transparency in many places in this book; it is more important than
ever. Also, prominence in the industry, or authority positioning , as I like
to call it, is something that I speak on but haven’t heard many managers
mention. I think that more than 90 percent of hedge funds are started
based on portfolio management and trading expertise and not on capital-raising or marketing abilities. This leads many hedge funds to be very
detailed in their risk management, trading, and investment processes but
light on public relations, investor databases, investor relationship man-
agement, investor communications, and authority positioning. This means
that many of the skills and practices of the manager may go unnoticed.
One last comment to what you just said, the importance of consistency:
Often institutional investors will knock managers off of a short list if their
average holding time, volatility, team, position sizes, liquidity, returns,investment process, operations, or risk management processes are not
consistent. From their point of view, input hopefully equals output, and
if the input is changed in a completely positive way, it can be seen as anunknown variable that the investor does not want to take a chance with.
Typically, managers I have worked with only learn of this after losing
some mandates for these types of reasons.
What have you learned not to do, or what have you stopped doing
related to trading or operations that was hurting your ﬁrm’s position as a
high-quality fund management business? Any lessons or tips to share on
this point?
Richard Zahm: Tight focus on lending discipline. Constantly relate local
market conditions to macro elements. Closely monitor related segments:
local and regional institutional lenders.
Richard Wilson: I think this is related to consistency once again, consis-
tently performing those activities to stay on target. Besides AUM, what
do you believe is most important for a hedge fund to focus on improving
when thinking about institutionalizing a hedge fund? Risk management?
Trading processes? Research? Pedigree?
Richard Zahm: In the end, it all comes down to consistent performance over
the long term. Other elements will be listed as being critical, and theyshould be addressed. But in the end it all comes down to doing what you
say you’re going to do, and being responsive to investors.Giant Hedge Funds 115
Richard Wilson: How has your ﬁrm gotten past the “under $100 million, no
institutional-quality operations” objection in the past? Gone to smallerinvestors who don’t hold this objection? Met with investors face-to-face?
Any lessons learned here?
Richard Zahm: Institutional quality has been less of an issue. Size is the
hurdle. Small investors have a number of advantages. They’re loyal,
they listen, and, most important, they’re only answering to themselves.
Redemption requests are linked to the performance of the fund, not theunderperformance of other funds. Smaller investors wanting full redemp-
tion, for example, don’t have the same impact as large investors wanting
to cash out all at once.
Richard Wilson: What are the top three resources or tools that you use to
run your hedge fund that are worth more than anything else? What are
the most valuable resources that you could recommend to others?
Richard Zahm: The network of bankers, attorneys, brokers, and other fund
managers provide the most critical tools. The network provides deal ﬂow,and it also provides a window to what’s happening outside of the imme-
diate loan and investment opportunities. Properly used, it also supplies
a backstop on assumptions, something that can become distorted in thefocus on details.
Richard Wilson: How important do you think service providers are to the
success of your fund? What process have you used to select these service
providers and what lessons have you learned about working with both
large and small service providers that your ﬁrm has worked with? You do
not have to use any names of individual ﬁrms—generic advice is ﬁne.
Richard Zahm: Service providers have traditionally played a minor, an-
cillary role in our segment due to the simplicity of our model and the
transparency of operations. Because of the relatively low velocity of indi-vidual investments, quarterly investor letters and annual audits have been
sufﬁcient.
Richard Wilson: In other sections of this book, many fund managers have
talked about how important service providers are to their fund. Can you
explain your perspective further?
Richard Zahm: Size of service providers is less important than their famil-
iarity with our industry segment. Size, in fact, actually worked against us:
Inferior services were provided at higher cost. In exchange for workingwith a provider with broad name recognition, we were saddled with less
skilled junior personnel. We ended up teaching them our business, while
paying for the privilege.
Richard Wilson: That’s a great case study example of the downside of work-
ing with the largest of service providers. I have experienced this same116 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
trouble while working with very large service providers. I think there is
a difference between a service provider with niche knowledge and an ex-perienced team versus a giant of a ﬁrm that hires 100 new professionals
each year. So you would suggest that really examining the team of the
service provider is key?
Richard Zahm: Sorting out the claims of proﬁciency versus actual capability
is key.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any other pieces of advice related to opera-
tional hedge fund best practices that you could share with other managers
in the industry?
Richard Zahm: Always keep in mind that you’re a small business. Even if
the AUM is enormous, basic start-up considerations remain.
Richard Wilson: Great advice—at least a third of the questions I get relate
to running a small business as a hedge fund manager. Many times hedge
funds aren’t described or analyzed as small businesses but they are in fact
just that.
What is the most challenging aspect of week-to-week or month-to-
month operations? How has your ﬁrm adapted to this challenge? What
tools have you found that help you manage this?
Richard Zahm: We’ve gone from a dependable, steady-state environment to
one that’s witnessing a dramatic loss of equity over a short period of time.
Richard Wilson: What speciﬁc changes has that brought to how you operate?
Richard Zahm: Investment models that have stood the test of time have been
put into question and are demanding new approaches and the incorpora-
tion of skills that were earlier separate.
Richard Wilson: Can you give us an example?
Richard Zahm: Bridge lending, mezzanine lending, and equity investment
are now intermingled with workouts, turnarounds, and development.Models that were geared to go forward are grinding in reverse, and we
have to contend not only with market changes but with the new role
being played by the government, all while the larger fund regulation
model is being modiﬁed. We’re in the crosshairs of regulators coming
to grips not just with mortgage lending but with banking and investorrelations.
The tools are pretty straightforward. It comes down to obtaining and
processing information, information that ranges from market to regula-tory, local to macro. It’s sophisticated, and changes come on what seem
to be a daily basis. That said, the opportunities are enormous for those
with the right combination of talent, expertise, and investment.
Richard Wilson: Thank you for all of this valuable information provided
here today—we appreciate your time invested here.
Richard Zahm: No problem, thank you.Giant Hedge Funds 117
SCOTT COHEN, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
HEDGE SOLUTIONS
Our next short interview is with Scott Cohen, president and CEO of Hedge
Solutions, a Los Angeles–based fund administrator that also offers back-
ofﬁce consulting services to small and large hedge funds. Scott has workedwith numerous hedge fund managers over his career and has seen ﬁrsthand
funds grow quickly, stagnate, and even close down. Over time he has picked
up some trends, best practices, and lessons to share with managers in theindustry.
Richard Wilson: What operational best practices do you see hedge funds
picking up that are somewhat new to the industry as a whole but have
existed in the largest of hedge funds for some time?
Scott Cohen: In light of recent fraud activity in the industry and the desire for
greater oversight by the federal government, fund managers are starting toadapt by addressing a greater need for transparency. The tone at the top
is still as important as ever, as it is ultimately up to management to ensure
that operations are structured to meet the needs of the marketplace. Forexample, information sharing through periodic investor communications,
such as newsletters and investor web sites, allows hedge funds to provide
some background on fund performance. Additionally, investor web sitesallow investors real-time and convenient access to account information;
not only can an investor access his capital balance but also current news,
audit reports, and K-1s. Some fund managers hold routine conference
calls to update clients, which also provide an opportunity for investors to
ask questions. Performance statistics and attribution analysis posted on
the web site are shared by managers with their investors on an ongoingbasis.
Richard Wilson: The one piece I picked out there that is not often put into
practice is the routine conference calls with investors. Most hedge funds
I have met with less than $250 million in assets do not host these calls,
and instead handle all communications on an individual basis. I think that
offering such transparency to the team and chief investment ofﬁcer is a
good way to keep the lines of communication open in both directions.
Based on the best practices of $1 billion-plus hedge funds and fast-
growing hedge funds, where do you believe most fund managers should
be reinvesting their money?
Scott Cohen: Hedge funds should be directing their efforts and resources
toward capturing and reporting information that is meaningful to their
investors, while also being mindful of the current and potential regu-
latory requirements of the investment adviser. Middle- and back-ofﬁce118 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
operations, though essential to the overall effectiveness of the organiza-
tion, are often overlooked. Most hedge funds use third-party administra-tors and rely on them to accurately report the ﬁnancial results of the fund
and each partner. By shadowing the administrator, the hedge fund will
be able to provide added review on the administrator and any reporting
issues can be addressed effectively.
Richard Wilson: What best practices do you see $1 billion-plus hedge funds
implementing that almost all small hedge funds ignore or discount?
Scott Cohen: Every hedge fund needs to consider internal controls and reg-
ulatory compliance. Funds smaller than $1 billion don’t always consider
instituting proper compliance programs, but compliance is ever more crit-ical in today’s environment. Regulatory bodies expect fund managers to
implement and monitor their compliance effectively. Moreover, institu-
tional investors now expect fund managers to have formal compliance
programs and strict internal controls, yet this is one area that small funds
ignore as they continue to target smaller clients that may lack institutionalinvestors. With the industry evolving toward stricter regulation, one way
for smaller funds to achieve a competitive advantage is to implement
stricter compliance mechanisms such as leveraging the use of their currentadministrator or using an outsourced compliance service.
Richard Wilson: Almost every hedge fund manager I know would like to
become a $1 billion-plus fund, for obvious reasons. Where should these
managers now invest money if they are already growing quickly and
gaining assets rapidly?
Scott Cohen: Hedge fund managers who are experiencing quick growth are
obviously aware of the need to gain better information in order to achieve
alpha. However, they are not always aware of the importance of ensuring
operational needs such as internal trade reconciliation with the broker andadequate record keeping. As the investment adviser grows, middle- and
back-ofﬁce requirements also expand. Hedge fund managers need to be
certain that internal compliance programs are robust enough to integrate
shifting staff roles and growth due to new hires. Along the same lines,
portfolio risk systems and back-ofﬁce systems must be implemented so asto manage the company’s business risk.
Richard Wilson: Where do you see hedge funds slowing down their own
growth due to lack of resources or skills? What mistakes do you see beingmade by very fast-growing $100 million-plus funds?
Scott Cohen: Very fast-growing $100 million-plus funds experience prob-
lems when they deviate from their principles on the portfolio. As man-agement of the portfolio shifts from one investment strategy to another
in order to make up the losses incurred in the portfolio, the potential forGiant Hedge Funds 119
further losses occurs. More often than not, over the long term, a minor
enhancement to the original investment strategy yields better results thanabandoning it. Another area of difﬁculty is lack of objectivity and proper
due diligence in the investment made. This could be caused in part by lack
of requisite skills. Sometimes investors will fully redeem from a particular
fund if they perceive that the fund manager is not addressing their needs
from a reporting perspective or not communicating effectively.
Richard Wilson: True. I also believe that a risk just as dangerous as poor per-
formance is coming across as inconsistent over time. If you have changed
your investment process once or twice, what may stop you from changing
it again? If you produced returns with one set of tools through up anddown markets, can we really trust that you can do the same now with a
larger team, and a so-called upgraded investment process?
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the importance of investment research versus
investment processes, please type this URL into your Web browser:
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Research
CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter provides some lessons and direct insights from how large
$1 billion-plus hedge funds are operated. Some key lessons from this chapter
include the following:
/squaresolidSmall hedge funds have a more granular feel of individual positions,
while larger funds make more strategic long-term decisions and have a
different focus.
/squaresolidLarger funds are typically able to diversify investments across a larger
pool of assets, especially within hard asset and large capital requirement
areas.
/squaresolidMany large hedge fund managers have learned to keep their diversity
model in place the hard way. It is tempting to run with what seems to
be working instead of diversifying your investments.120 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
/squaresolidStrong internal controls, compliance procedures, and risk reporting are
things that large hedge funds have in place that most small hedge fundsstruggle with.
/squaresolidIt is recommended that to compete with the largest of hedge funds, youshould pay attention to investor requirements for large investors withoutlosing sight of what made you a successful small or medium-size hedge
fund.
/squaresolidTo help compete against giant hedge funds and emulate their success,
Richard Zahm suggests focusing on transparency, prominence within
the industry, innovation, consistency, and investor communications.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.True or false: Scott Cohen states in this chapter that he doesn’t believe
that the “tone at the top” is important any longer as ﬁnancial controlsand compliance processes have taken the front stage within the hedge
fund industry.
2.True or false: A risk just as big as poor performance is appearing and
acting inconsistent over time.
3.Richard Zahm suggests that even when you are managing $800 million
or $1 billion,
still apply.
a.Business negotiation tactics.
b.Business start-up considerations.
c.Capital-raising best practices.
4.A lesson to take away from large hedge fund operations is that the size
of a hedge fund service provider does not always determine the quality
of service; the most important thing to consider is .
a.How they work with other service providers.
b.How familiar they are with your strategy.
c.How many years they have been in business.
d.How familiar they are already with your team.
5.In this chapter it is suggested that the advantages of building a large
$1 billion fund based on smaller investors include all of the following
except:
a.Loyalty.
b.They listen.
c.They are only answering to themselves.
d.They complete due diligence more quickly.
6.True or false: To stay in the forefront of the mind of potential investors,
it is a best practice of very large hedge funds to check in on the status
of due diligence processes every three to four days.Giant Hedge Funds 121
7.True or false: In this chapter it is suggested that you forget about being
an authority on your subject and your prominence in the industry, andfocus instead on having high-quality ﬁnancial controls, infrastructure,
and institutional-quality operations in place.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 8
Governance Best Practices
Excellence is an art won by training and habituation. We do not
act rightly because we have virtue or excellence, but we rather
have those because we have acted rightly. We are what we
repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act but a habit.
—Aristotle
This chapter provides an interview-based overview of fund governance andthe ways in which many hedge funds are creating more robust checks and
balances in their own fund operations to prevent abuse and create a more
sustainable business at the same time.
Why important : Fund governance is by far the most consistently ignored
part of running a hedge fund as a real business. Every year the importance of
having strong governance procedures in place grows, and we see no slowing
down or potential reversal of this trend.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund governance best practices and
practical strategies, please type this URL into your Web browser:
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Governance
Fund governance is a valuable area to learn more about because most
funds have relatively weak internal controls, independent boards, and checks
and balance systems in place. Most funds are focused ﬁrst on managing their
123The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 124 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
portfolio and second on raising capital; operational issues or governance
procedures are often afterthoughts or formalities.
Lately the hedge fund industry has been marred by cases of fraud. In
some cases individual employees of a hedge fund committed acts which
placed the hedge fund manager’s business in jeopardy. If you don’t have
these governance procedures in place, you may be opening the door for a
future employee to commit such acts. No internal control or structure can
completely prevent fraud or abuse, but it can help—and it can also showinvestors that you have reinvested in the stability of your own business.
ANDREW MAIN, MANAGING PARTNER, STRATTON
STREET CAPITAL LLP
Our team recently completed an in-depth interview with Andrew Main,
managing partner at Stratton Street Capital LLP. Andrew has been a key
participant in placing strong corporate governance rules in place since the
inception of the funds under management. His team has picked up manybest practices and processes which may aide other hedge fund managers or
investors who are seeking to better understand this concept.
Richard Wilson: Why have you personally taken such a strong interest in
implementing strong corporate governance procedures?
Andrew Main: Lessons of the past two years have shown that strong in-
dependent oversight of a hedge fund should be an important step in aninvestor’s due diligence regarding how a fund is run. As the hedge fund
community matures, institutional investors will more and more want to
see their interests not only aligned with the manager’s but also overseenby a strong independent board. In turn, the board may introduce new
opportunities to the investment manager or adviser in attracting investors
to the fund through their introductions and role in the process.
We are currently living and working through a very dynamic time. As
our industry increasingly becomes more institutionalized it moves awayfrom its reliance on a leveraged high net worth (HNW) client investor
base. Many funds will have also learned the lesson of relying too heavily
on the fund of funds sector but will want to attract institutional capital
directly. One of the roles of the fund of funds as the institutional investor’s
gatekeeper was to act as their eyes and ears on what was actually going
on in the fund or in the fund’s investment management company. Recentevents have shown that in many cases this reliance has not actually been
executed. Therefore small boutique funds and managers can easily adoptGovernance Best Practices 125
high corporate governance standards that will put many larger managers
to shame. The problem then is how does the institutional investor learnabout the manager and his funds?
Richard Wilson: How many board members should there be on a single
board?
Andrew Main: Our board has consisted of four to six members at any one
time. A diverse board is more valuable than a homogenous one.
Richard Wilson: Can you provide an example of how this has affected
potential investors who are completing due diligence on your funds?
Andrew Main: Several years ago we were going through a day’s due diligence
with a large institutional investor looking to open a managed accountwith us. It happened to coincide with the quarterly visit from one of the
fund’s independent board members making his own due diligence review.
We therefore suggested the two meet and sit down together and talk
alone about us as a manager, in our ofﬁce. The institutional investor who
had spent several hours asking many penetrating questions was lost forwords. He openly admitted never having had the opportunity to meet a
nonexecutive director of a fund, and said that as a result, he did not know
what to ask!
Richard Wilson: Let’s start with the basics. What is the purpose of the fund
board?
Andrew Main: To collectively be responsible for the central control of the
fund by overseeing the affairs of the appropriate interests of the sharehold-
ers and relevant stakeholders while at all times ensuring the protection of
investors.
Richard Wilson: Can you go into greater detail on exactly what responsi-
bilities the board should hold and what their role is? Maybe something
granular enough that hedge fund managers reading this could think aboutconstructing their own board?
Andrew Main: Sure. First off, all directors need to recognize their collec-
tive responsibility for the statutory obligations of the fund as well as
the strategic, ﬁnancial, and key personnel matters and focus strongly on
the correct delegation, supervision, reporting, monitoring, and control re-sponsibilities of the board. So the ﬁrst three categories of primary duties
are statutory obligations, strategic review, and business and compliance
review.
1.Statutory obligations may include such varied matters as:
a.Preparation of prospectus and constitutional documents; review
and approval of annual report and accounts, ﬁnal dividend, circu-
lars to shareholders, and listing particulars and requirements.126 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
b.Interim report and accounts and the returns to regulators and stock
exchanges.
c.Compliance with listing rules and their continuing obligations.
d.Monitoring of marketing activities.
e.Equal treatment of shareholders.
f.Accountability to shareholders and responsibility to relevant stake-
holders.
2.Strategic review. As part of the exercise, we regard it as best practice
to review once a year (we do it at the time of signing off full audited
accounts) that the fund, through the execution of its investment policy,
has not strayed from its vision and mission as set out in the prospectus.It has a clear vision of its forward-going strategy and future develop-
ment. It is also a good idea to review where it has come in the past
year, especially measured against its peer group.
3.Business and compliance review. As an independent board, it is very
important that each board member looks at the fund through a dif-ferent set of eyes. In an ideal world it is useful to have independent
directors who bring fund management, administrative, legal, account-
ing, and shareholder experience to a fund. It is not necessary for theinvestment manager or adviser to be on the board, as they may simply
attend and report to the board, thus ensuring preservation of indepen-
dence. However, the board must be able to look at their activities and
decide on the appointment and review of the service providers of all
functions to the fund.
This review should include, on an annual basis, the fund company secre-
tary, investment manager, investment adviser, administrator, prime bro-
ker, and/or custodian. They should also review the work of the fundauditors, lawyers, and other independent professional advisers such as
outside risk monitoring or third-party marketers of the fund. The board
should review its annual directors and ofﬁcers liability insurance to ensure
its adequacy to protect all interested parties. It may decide, depending on
their complexity, to delegate some of these functions to internal or exter-
nal committees. The board should also review the overall compliance of
the fund to fulﬁll its functions and that all its statutory duties have been
fulﬁlled.
Richard Wilson: Could you summarize in a more concise way what the
high-level duties of board members are?
Andrew Main: Sure. Their primary duties are statutory obligations, strategic
and ﬁnancial matters, key man matters, reporting monitoring and control
responsibilities, annual review of composition and effectiveness of the
board, and corporate governance.Governance Best Practices 127
Richard Wilson: Now, for those who are either sitting on boards or are
thinking about improving their board, what types of activities speciﬁcallydo board members complete each year?
Andrew Main: Well, these activities span across many areas, but here is
a bullet-point list of many of the responsibilities our board members
take on:
/squaresolidDevelopment and measuring against the company’s vision and mission.
/squaresolidStrategy of development plan and progress in achieving that plan.
/squaresolidSigniﬁcant changes in accounting policy.
/squaresolidApproval of risk management guidelines.
/squaresolidStatutory obligations such as monitoring of marketing activities and
investor relations procedures.
/squaresolidSufﬁcient and timely ﬁnancial information and reports provided to the
board.
/squaresolidAppointment and review of key service providers such as the primebroker, custodian, administrator, or third-party marketer.
/squaresolidEnsuring adequate resources are in place for ongoing operations.
/squaresolidDelegation of board powers to ad hoc committees as needed to addresscritical issues.
/squaresolidEnsuring internal controls and procedures are in place and are adequate.
/squaresolidObtaining appropriate and timely information to fulﬁll their obliga-tions.
/squaresolidReview of all internal and external audit and compliance reports and
associated regulatory reviews by third parties.
/squaresolidEnsuring that a satisfactory compliance regime exists and that all rel-
evant local and international laws, procedures, guidance notes, and
controls to combat money laundering, terrorist ﬁnancing, and other
criminal activities are upheld.
Richard Wilson: That seems like more work and implementation than some
hedge funds may be willing to do, especially if they are an emergingmanager with a new fund.
Andrew Main: In adopting such a structure, it may give the investors comfort
that their interests are being protected. The amount and depth of oversight
will obviously vary with the development of the fund. It is important not to
overload the total expense ratio of the fund with too many wise men but to
have sufﬁcient to carry out the basics in the early days of the fund. As thefund matures and we become much more involved in a world dominated
by regulatory and investor oversight, the fund needs to demonstrate its
strengths to act independently. However, it must not become too bogged128 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
down in latest fashions but maintain a standard in the best interest of
shareholders and stakeholders.
Richard Wilson: The board oversees many activities. Can you summarize to
whom the board members are ultimately responsible?
Andrew Main: The board has ultimate responsibility to the shareholder,
relevant stakeholders, their regulator (if regulated), oversight of the out-
sourced services of the fund, and oversight of the investment manager and
the fund.
Richard Wilson: What other advice could you give about properly construct-
ing a board?
Andrew Main: I would suggest, as I mentioned earlier, looking for comple-
mentary, diverse skill sets. For example, one of our past boards consisted
of a former accountant, a managing director from a bank, an adviser on
the topic of corporate governance, and a country adviser specialist. This
team was able to help us not only manage our corporate governance but
constantly improve it over time as well.
Richard Wilson: Many times when I hear hedge funds discuss corporate
governance, the purpose of the board can seem fuzzy, and I believe this
may sometimes lead to putting off decisions on forming a board or havinga very active board that really oversees the activities of the fund. What
would be a concise way to describe the key purpose of the board?
Andrew Main: To collectively be responsible for maximizing the company’s
success by directing and supervising the affairs of the business and meeting
the appropriate interests of the shareholders and relevant stakeholders
while enhancing the value of the fund and ensuring protection of investors.
Richard Wilson: Could you provide some guidance on board meetings, how
should they be conducted and structured to be effective?
Andrew Main: We hold quarterly meetings and the fund manager/adviser is
always present at these meetings. During the meeting we review the fund
and its activities, go over the list of shareholders, and conduct corporate
governance reviews.
Richard Wilson: In this model some power is taken away from the fund
manager and placed with the board members. How do you monitor theirparticipation to ensure they are fulﬁlling their duties?
Andrew Main: We have the board assess whether members need to be
replaced. We allow in-person or over-the-phone participation by boardmembers but expect and have the majority of meetings attended in person.
Richard Wilson: Do you have any closing thoughts before we wrap
this up?
Andrew Wilson: A well-functioning board is an excellent trustee and a great
resource to all interested parties. Take the time to set up the board theGovernance Best Practices 129
right way and it will work for you over the long term. Make sure and use
the board in your due diligence processes.
Richard Wilson: Oftentimes there are references to nonexecutive advisory
boards or independent boards. Can you explain what the term nonexec-
utive really means?
Andrew Main: The majority of board members are the nonexecs. In fact, we
do not have any fund managers on our boards. We want the fund man-
agers to report their activity to the board so there can be both integrationand independence between the two groups. That further shows the split
in roles. We feel that the board members should bring a different view
of the fund so we try and have people from different backgrounds—anindependent market professional, a lawyer, accountant, administrator,
and so on. A nonexecutive does not form part of the executive manage-
ment of the fund manager or the funds investment decisions but performs
a role of central control of the fund through roles of scrutiny, construc-
tive comment on development, ascertaining that risk controls are robustenough and ﬁnancial data accurate, and so on.
Richard Wilson: I have seen in some of your speeches on governance best
practices that you discuss the importance of “board packs.” Could youexplain what these are exactly?
Andrew Main: A board pack is collated by the fund administrator and is sent
out in advance of the meeting to be reviewed by the board of directors.
The topics in our last pack were:
/squaresolidApologies and appointment of alternates.
/squaresolidQuorum.
/squaresolidDirectors’ interests.
/squaresolidMinutes of last meeting and any committee meetings (audit, etc.).
/squaresolidMatters arising.
/squaresolidReview of ﬁnancial statements (we reviewed our interims).
/squaresolidManager’s report.
/squaresolidFund manager reviews.
/squaresolidMarketing review.
/squaresolidCorporate governance review.
/squaresolidAnnual review of prospectus.
/squaresolidAdministrators’ report which includes report of the administrator, com-
pliance review of designated manager and custodian, company’s secre-
tary review, stock exchange notices for listing of funds, and continuing
obligations.
/squaresolidFuture dates of meetings.
/squaresolidAny other business.130 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: Great, that is helpful. Can you reveal some of the costs
associated with building this type of independent board?
Andrew Main: Overall cost of the meetings will be part of the administration
cost plus directors’ fees and expenses for attending the meeting. I would
think you should be looking at $15,000 per annum fees upward per
director. Hence, as part of the administration cost, we do review the total
expense ratio of the fund, and so on.
DAVID R. KOENIG, CEO OF THE GOVERNANCE
FUND, LLC
The second interview we completed for this chapter of the book was with
David R. Koenig, CEO of the Governance Fund, LLC, an investment man-
ager which, in their words, “seeks to capture the hidden performance gapbetween publicly traded companies that are well-governed and those which
are poorly governed.” I thought this was an interesting strategy, because
in studying what good and poor governance mean they would be able to
explain some of the importance of having it in place and what that means
to investors.
Here is a brief history of David’s professional experience: David R.
Koenig is the founder and chief executive ofﬁcer of The Governance Fund,
LLC. His work in risk management and governance is internationally recog-
nized. Prior to founding The Governance Fund, LLC, Mr. Koenig served as
chair of the board and executive director of the Professional Risk Managers’
International Association (PRMIA) and president of the PRMIA Institute.
In 2008, he was bestowed PRMIA’s top honor, the Higher Standard Award,
for his contributions to the global risk profession. He was also named as one
of the ﬁrst 100 members of the Risk Who’s Who International HonorarySociety, a select group of individuals who have inﬂuenced the international
practice of risk management.
Richard Wilson: Let’s start at the top: Why is strong governance an impor-
tant thing for both hedge funds and corporations to have in place?
David R. Koenig: The quality of an organization’s governance affects its
value in three main ways. First, well-governed organizations make betterdecisions, which leads to expectations of better growth. Second, well-
governed ﬁrms have imbedded resilience and the ability to change as con-
ditions in an industry or asset class change. Witness the many high-proﬁle,abrupt endings to ﬁnancial service companies during the 2007–2009 ﬁ-
nancial crisis. Well-governed companies are resilient, ductile, and complex
adaptive systems. In response to stresses, they bend, but don’t break. TheirGovernance Best Practices 131
strength provides them the opportunity to adjust to new realities. They
reform and they remain strong.
Third, investors will more greatly discount their expectations of future
earnings for poorly governed companies because they represent a higher
risk of surprises. Work in psychology and behavioral ﬁnance has shown
that people have a strong drive for loss avoidance. They fear large losses
much more than they value large gains. In fact, the dislike of large losses
has been valued at more than two times the desire for gains. So compa-nies that present investors with the possibility of large losses are assigned
higher discount rates by the investors. As noted earlier, poorly governed
companies are more likely to be subject to large, surprise losses. In somecases, those surprise losses will end their existence. Well-governed com-
panies, however, can come to be perceived as presenting a lower risk of
large, surprise losses, and their value increases due to their lower discount
factor applied to their future earnings.
Richard Wilson: So basically, having strong governance in place helps the
organization avoid pitfalls and avoid closing down due to operational
business missteps as well?
David R. Koenig: In short, good governance adds value; poor governance
detracts from it.
Richard Wilson: Can you provide us with some governance factors you
look at in corporations that could also be assessed by investors looking at
hedge fund governance structures?
David R. Koenig: Sure. From a structural standpoint, some of these factors
include:
/squaresolidChairman/CEO separation.
/squaresolidBoard composition.
/squaresolidOfﬁce turnover.
/squaresolidLate ﬁlings.
/squaresolidChange in external auditing.
/squaresolidShareholder controls.
From an accounting and forensics standpoint—in other words, how
companies “live” their governance—some factors include:
/squaresolidAccrued expenses.
/squaresolidDeferred taxes.
/squaresolidLate ﬁlings.
/squaresolidExtraordinary expenses.
/squaresolidActuarial assumptions related to pension liabilities.132 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Richard Wilson: While governance is something that most fund managers
agree is important to have in place, how come more hedge fund managersdo not already have these practices in place?
David R. Koenig: The difference may stem from whether you view your
company as a business, or just a trading strategy. If the former, you have
a very different perspective on your relationship to your customers. Good
governance happens when the process of decision making and implemen-
tation is accountable, transparent, responsive, effective, and efﬁcient. Itdoesn’t happen by accident—it only works when it is a priority and it is
intentional. You have such an intention when you focus on the needs of
your customers ﬁrst.
Richard Wilson: Everyone in the hedge fund industry talks about the need for
“increased transparency,” but beside the use of separate accounts, what
types of processes or access can hedge fund managers provide investors
to increase their level of transparency?
David R. Koenig: Clients have a right to understand what is being done with
their funds, both in terms of the strategies being pursued and the risks
being taken. Without transparency to positions and trades, it is difﬁcult
for investors to have complete conﬁdence that their investment mandateis being adhered to, or that their expectations are being met. Therefore,
transparency of all positions and trades taken by The Governance Fund,
LLC, on behalf of a client is available via two methods designed to protect
the proprietary nature of the process we use.
Investors who are willing to sign a nondisclosure agreement with an
intellectual property clause related to the reverse-engineering of strategiescan have complete transparency with respect to all positions and all trans-
actions on a daily basis. Alternatively, without any additional agreements,
all investors in the funds that we manage are given full transparency onall positions and all trades, ﬁve times per year, on any day they choose.
Using these methods, we as the investment manager provide investors in
the fund with the appropriate transparency to our operations.
In addition to these two views into the positions, we have created a
Governance and Risk Management Advisory Board, composed of inter-nationally recognized leaders in risk management, governance, and ﬁ-
nance. They meet quarterly to review the risk management and governance
of The Governance Fund, LLC, and the minutes of their meeting related tothis review are made available to all investors in the funds that we manage.
This is something distinctive in the investment management ﬁeld.
Richard Wilson: Over the past three years there have been many discussions
about hedge funds readjusting their management and performance fee
calculations to take a more long-term interest alongside the investor. The
argument is that if a hedge fund manager could potentially take on a largeGovernance Best Practices 133
amount of risk with other people’s money, they may do so to aim for a
$100 million-plus payday. What has your ﬁrm put into place to align theﬁnancial incentives of your fund more closely with your investors?
David R. Koenig: Our annual management fees range from 0.5 percent
to 2.0 percent of beginning period assets under management (AUM).
Management fees are maximized when we do well. If we don’t perform,
we give some of our fees back to the customer via a reduced management
fee. “Doing well” means hitting both our return and risk targets.
Similarly, incentive fees are earned only after we pass a hurdle rate.
When they are earned, rather than being paid in cash, they are paid in
fund interests with a hard lock for two years from the date of payment.This further aligns the manager’s interests with those of our investors.
In addition, incentive fees are capped to prevent any conﬂicting incentive
toward excessive risk taking. An example is the following table, which
comes from two of the funds we have been engaged to manage.
Hurdle Rateof ReturnShare of
ExcessRate of Return
Cap forIncentive Fee
CalculationsEffective Cap on
Incentive Fees
Relative
Return
Strategy2.0% above
the index50% 8.0% above the
index3% of beginning
of period AUM
Absolute
Return
Strategy5.0% 30% 15% 3% of beginning
of period AUM
Richard Wilson: Others have also stressed the importance of using trusted
service providers who have expertise and a history of client relationships
in the hedge fund space. Do you agree with this approach?
David R. Koenig: Separation of duties and the engagement of leading service
providers are essential elements to an operationally sound and successful
control environment. We agree wholeheartedly.
Richard Wilson: Would you agree with me that hedge funds need to be
considering strong governance as a must-have instead of a nice-to-have in
today’s marketplace?
David R. Koenig: Effective corporate governance, while complex, is essential
to the long-range success of any organization. Again, if you recognize that
you are running a business, whose key asset is its clients, then the answerbecomes clear.134 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
CHAPTER SUMMARY
In this chapter we discuss some governance best practices that hedge funds
can follow to improve their decision making, capital-raising abilities, and,
most importantly, risk management environment. Some key lessons from
this chapter include the following:
/squaresolidMany small to medium-size hedge funds have poor internal ﬁnancial
controls, and few have independent boards that take the perspective of
the investor in all decisions.
/squaresolidThe main purpose of an independent board for a hedge fund is to col-lectively be responsible for the central control of the fund by overseeingthe affairs of the appropriate interests of the shareholders and relevant
stakeholders while at all times ensuring protection of the investors.
/squaresolidThe board’s primary duties are statutory obligations, strategic and ﬁ-
nancial matters, personnel matters, report monitoring and control re-
sponsibilities, annual review of composition and effectiveness of the
board, and corporate governance.
/squaresolidEmploying hedge fund governance best practices not only protects your
business from some types of operational and fraud risks, but it also
helps position your ﬁrm when marketing, and it improves decision-making processes.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.No internal control structure can .
a.Completely prevent fraud.
b.Assure investors positive ﬁnancial returns.
c.Protect the capital within a hedge fund.
2.True or false: One of the reasons why fund governance is becoming
more important is that funds of hedge funds were somewhat seen as
the eyes and ears of smaller investors, but they have recently failed to
conduct adequate due diligence and research.
3.Andrew Main suggests that a board should complete a strategic review
once a .
a.Month.
b.Quarter.
c.Year.
4.True or false: Independent boards of advisers should be constructed of
one type of professionals: forensic accounting and audit professionals.Governance Best Practices 135
This type of professional will always serve both the fund and investors
best.
5.It is suggested in this chapter that board meetings be conducted at least
once per .
a.Week.
b.Month.
c.Quarter.
d.Year.
6.What does it mean to have a nonexecutive board of advisers?
a.To have a board made up of professionals in other industries who
bring a unique view of the business.
b.To have a board made up of junior-level professionals with unique
perspectives on improving business operations.
c.To have a board which is made up of professionals who do not
also serve as portfolio managers or executives within the day-to-day
running of the fund.
7.The cost of building a good board should probably be around
per director on the board.
a.$8,500
b.$15,000
c.$22,500
d.$25,000
8.Good governance ; poor governance .
a.Costs lots of money, doesn’t cost much.
b.Is rare, is very common.
c.Adds value, detracts from it.
9.True or false: David R. Koenig believes that while good governance is
nice to have, it is not essential to the long-term success of a hedge fund.
10. Poorly governed funds are more likely to have surprise
.
a.Large, losses.
b.Small, losses.
c.Large, gains.
d.Small, gains.
Answers : To view the answers to these questions, please see http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/AnswersCHAPTER 9
Frequently Asked Hedge
Fund Questions
You are your greatest asset. Put your time, effort, and money into
training, grooming, and encouraging your greatest asset.
—Tom Hopkins
This chapter covers the most frequently asked questions about hedge funds.Our company receives over 150,000 e-mails each year, many of them
asking the same questions that are covered here in this chapter.
HEDGE FUNDS 101
Question: What is a hedge fund?
Answer : A hedge fund is a private investment vehicle in which investors
in the fund typically are charged a management fee plus a performance-
based fee. While this deﬁnition has been true for some time now, there
are dozens of variations of hedge funds, and many look a lot like private
equity funds and venture capital funds. While the hedge fund industry has
been organically growing in real size, it is also growing simply due to the
application of the name hedge fund to an increasing number of investment
vehicles. Typical hedge fund management fees are between 1 and 2 percent,
and typical performance fees range from 15 to 30 percent. Investors are
drawn to hedge funds because they have strong incentives to perform very
well in order to take down a large dollar ﬁgure as part of the performancefee charged by the fund. While some would say this is a light version of the
deﬁnition, the truth is that the model has expanded in so many directions
that any more details would leave out billions of dollars worth of hedge fund
137The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 138 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
strategies and models. The industry truly is deﬁned by the fees the funds now
charge and how those are structured to the investor.
Question: What is a fund of hedge funds?
Answer : A fund of hedge funds is an investment fund that allows a single
investor broad access to many different hedge funds through one investment.
The fund of hedge funds typically researches dozens or hundreds of hedge
fund managers in order to optimize and invest for clients in a basket of
well-performing hedge funds. A fund of hedge funds earns fees on top ofthe hedge fund management and performance fees already embedded in this
type of investment. Investors are drawn to funds of hedge funds for the
superior research and due diligence conducted and the diversity of hedgefund risk exposures that may be found in these vehicles.
Question: What is the difference between a multistrategy hedge fund
and a fund of hedge funds?
Answer : A multistrategy hedge fund is a fund that runs multiple strate-
gies such as long/short, 130/30, global macro, merger arbitrage, and so on,all in the same fund. This fund will typically charge a single layer of fees
similar to any other hedge fund. This contrasts with a fund of hedge funds,
which could be focused on one or two hedge fund strategies or many in a di-versiﬁed model where an additional layer of fees is applied for the research,
due diligence, and risk management research that went into constructing the
portfolio of unique hedge fund managers in the fund.
Question: What hedge fund books would you recommend reading?
Answer : We offer a free-to-download 200-plus-page e-book on hedge
funds, online at http://HedgeFundsBook.com. We also suggest visitingHedgeFundBookStore.com to review the short list of books that our team
has selected for the CHP Designation Program. We reviewed over 55
books on hedge funds before selecting this group of texts for our trainingprogram.
Question: What is the role of an institutional investment consultant?
Answer : Institutional investment consultants are investment advisers to
mainly large institutional investors such as pension funds, foundations, en-
dowments, or family ofﬁces. Investment decisions are often made with theadvice of these consultants, and sometimes parts or whole portfolios are
placed under the control and investment decision making of these insti-
tutional consultants. Hedge fund managers are typically interested in de-veloping strong relationships with institutional consultants because those
managers with over $80 million or $100 million in assets can often build
relationships with these consultants and possibly gain allocations from theirinstitutional investor clients.
Question: How strong is the industry outside of the United States and
Europe?Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 139
Answer : The hedge fund industry is diverse and spread out around
the world. Australia, Brazil, South Africa, and Russia are all hubs of CTAfund and hedge fund activity. I met with a CTA fund in S ˜ao Paulo, Brazil,
last year for lunch and he mentioned that he personally knew of over 300
funds similar to his which are based in S ˜ao Paulo. While many international
locations may lack more than a handful of $750 million-plus hedge funds,
they house thousands of small to medium-size hedge fund managers who
together control a lot of assets and hire a respectable number of employeesas well.
Question: What is the quickest way to gain more knowledge about
hedge funds right now?
Answer : Many times I hear from professionals who have been reading
HedgeFundBlogger.com, who have read this book, or who read our hedge
fund e-book and they are hungry to learn more. Here are my four top tips
on moving up the learning curve on everything hedge funds:
1.Our free 200-page hedge fund e-book (http://HedgeFundsBook.com).
2.Sign up for Google Alerts for the terms “Hedge Fund,” “Hedge Funds,”
and so on. This will allow Google to e-mail you once a week as new
Web stories or blog articles come out on hedge funds.
3.Subscribe to HedgeFundBlogger.com and receive our daily e-mail
newsletter about the hedge fund industry.
4.Subscribe to ﬁve educational blogs on the topic of hedge funds. Sug-
gestions include HedgeFundBlogger.com, Fintag.com, FT AlphaVille
(FTalphaville.ft.com), and the Albourne Village newsletter found at
Village.Albourne.com.
HEDGE FUND OPERATIONS
Question: I am a solid trader with a solid back-tested model. Should I start
a hedge fund?
Answer : The hard truth is probably not. Most traders do not have the
level of pedigree or supporting capital that is needed to launch and grow a
fund from the ground up. That said, new hedge funds are launched daily,
and many funds do make it to a proﬁtable level of assets under management
(AUM) and do very well. It is important to do your research before you spend
any money on service providers or legal formation. Work up your budget,
write a business plan, write a marketing plan, meet with potential friendsand family investors, and speak with other small hedge fund managers.
Raising capital and growing a long track record that will attract investors
both take a long time and a lot of patience.140 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Question : What is one operational fund management process you could
provide me with that I can take away and really use in my business today?I need something low cost as we manage less than $100 million in assets as
a fund.
Answer: One person who has affected me in business has been William
Edward Deming. He once said, “If you can’t describe what you are doing
as a process, you don’t know what you are doing.” I think this also goes
along with another popular business quote: “What gets documented getsimproved.”
Most investment funds and family ofﬁces that I have worked with do not
have an investor cultivation process or pipeline drawn out as a process. Theydo not have their ongoing investor communication strategy documented,
and in many places the only documentation of their investment process is
at a very high level in their marketing materials. I think many hedge funds,
portfolio managers, and capital raisers could beneﬁt from using PowerPoint
presentations or a free program such as Bubbl (www.bubbl.us) to documenttheir processes.
This documenting of critical processes takes little time and costs noth-
ing to do, but it allows you to step back from the process and evaluate it,improve it, or delegate where appropriate. Our ﬁrm recently used Bubbl and
PowerPoint together to describe a business process we were completing our-
selves, and we were able to use this not only internally but also externally as
we trained a third party to whom we decided to outsource some of this work.
The processes I have found valuable to document are:
/squaresolidInvestor acquisition process.
/squaresolidCurrent investor communication strategy.
/squaresolidHiring new employees.
/squaresolidManaging your portfolio on an ongoing basis.
Question: What exactly does a fund administration ﬁrm do? What is
the scope of their services?
Answer : A fund administration ﬁrm helps with the day-to-day opera-
tions of running a hedge fund. Activities that typical administration ﬁrms
may take on for a fund include:
/squaresolidMonthly accounting.
/squaresolidTax preparation assistance.
/squaresolidProcessing of subscriptions and redemptions.
/squaresolidThird-party controls.
/squaresolidAudit assistance.
/squaresolidAnti–money laundering (AML) compliance.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 141
/squaresolidInvestor communications.
/squaresolidDaily reconciliation of trades.
/squaresolidEmployee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) tracking.
/squaresolidOperational assistance.
/squaresolidManagement company accounting.
Question: What are your top ﬁve pieces of advice for a hedge fund that
is just now starting up?
Answer : Our ﬁrm speaks with over 300 hedge fund start-ups and emerg-
ing hedge fund managers each year. We typically hear from managers when
they need help selecting service providers such as a formation attorney orprime brokerage ﬁrm, or we get requests to help these funds raise capital for
their new funds. Here are our top ﬁve tips for hedge fund start-ups:
1.It is harder to raise capital than you think, so get all of your capital-
raising processes, investor database resources, and sales professionals in
place before you start your fund.
2.Focus on developing a unique investment process and competitive
advantage in the industry: What unique edge can you constantly bebuilding?
3.Risk management and institutionalization are key for your fund. Focus
on how to be more transparent than your competitors. Decide where
you can invest early in technology, research, or pedigree to raise the
institutional quality of your fund offering.
4.Investors want to see that you have skin in the game. Make sure you do
have some of yourself invested and communicate that to investors.
5.Face-to-face relationships work. Meet with as many potential investors,
service providers, and consultants in person as possible. This leads tomore trust, momentum, and productivity in everything you touch.
Question : Do you have any suggestions on how we could run our hedge
fund business better from an operational or business point of view so that
we are seen as more of an authority in the industry?
Answer : Sure. One way in which people are inﬂuenced every day
is through our orienting reﬂex. The orienting reﬂex is the process we
go through while reacting to something novel, new, or mysterious. It iswhat makes ﬁrst dates, roller coasters, and vacations to exotic islands so
enjoyable.
When a loud alarm goes off we stop and ask ourselves why it is going
off and whether it has any impact on us. If you are in the middle of a
movie at your local theater and the ﬁre alarm starts to go off, everyone will
look around for a minute before taking action. Each person is orienting142 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
themselves to this new situation and combination of variables, and they are
looking for instructions from other people’s actions, their past experiences,or some sort of authority such as a movie theater employee. This very
moment, while the movie audience is determining what to do next, is when
they are most easily inﬂuenced. This same rule applies to changes in stock
market conditions and the reaction of Wall Street analysts and investment
news broadcasters.
If you can be the person to suggest a strategy or provide additional
credible evidence when others are still orienting to a new environment, you
can be very inﬂuential very quickly.
You can apply this in your fund by being the ﬁrst to address an industry
development such as new investor regulations, or an industry-changing fraud
event like Madoff. Interpret these events and focus on making sense of what
will likely come next. This can be done on a smaller level with events that
come up each quarter in the industry.
Question: How can I network with other hedge fund managers and
industry professionals?
Answer : The best way to network with other hedge fund managers
and industry professionals is through the Hedge Fund Group, a free-to-join association of industry professionals. This group now has over 30,000
members from around the world, and you may join today by visiting
HedgeFundGroup.org and clicking on the “Join” link at the top right-hand
side of the home page.
HEDGE FUND MARKETING AND SALES
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a 45-minute video on hedge fund marketing best
practices, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Capital-Raising-Strategies
Question : What does a typical third-party marketing arrangement look like?
What are the payouts like?
Answer : Third-party marketing arrangements typically involve the mar-
keter receiving 20 percent of both the management and performance fees
on assets raised for ﬁve years, seven years, or in perpetuity for as long asthe investor remains invested in the fund. In addition to the fee sharing,Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 143
most third-party marketers will also charge some level of a retainer, which
can range from $1,000/month to $12,000/month, to help cover the ongoingmarketing costs of the marketer. If your hedge fund is looking to engage a
third-party marketer, please read some of our free advice on this niche area
of business at ThirdPartyMarketing.com, a free educational e-magazine on
the third-party marketing industry.
Question: We are looking for capital. Would a hedge fund invest in my
real estate venture or private company?
Answer : The hedge fund universe is diverse and there are hedge funds
that invest in real estate or in private companies, but these are few and
far between. You will need to obtain a specialized database of these typesof hedge fund managers, or screen carefully in one of the large hedge fund
database providers found online. For further information on databases, both
free and paid, please see InvestorDatabases.com, HedgeFund.Net, Hedge-
FundResearch.com, or FamilyOfﬁcesDatabase.com for more information.
Question: How long will it take us to raise capital after we launch our
fund?
Answer : The sales cycle is six to nine months long in retail channels
and 9 to 18 months long in institutional channels. This assumes that yourfund has a three- to ﬁve-year or longer track record and a high enough level
of AUM to approach each of these markets. Raising capital from investors
other than friends and family in your ﬁrst two years is very challenging.
The best route of action is to consider seed capital or approach high net
worth (HNW) accredited investors for potential investments. Even the most
experienced third-party marketers and capital raisers need 9 to 12 monthsto close on a signiﬁcant level of assets, and many need two to three years to
really work through their contact Rolodex and use all of their methods of
attracting capital to clients. It is important to know this up front when youstart a fund, both for budgeting and for setting reasonable expectations of
anyone you hire or bring on as a third-party marketer for the fund.
Question : Can you provide us some tips on how to develop relationships
with investors? Is there a process we could follow at a very high level?
Answer : Yes, there is. I was making my way through some marketing
training materials last year from Mr. Frank Kern and came across a market-
ing process which may seem somewhat like common sense, but it helps to
think about these things to ensure that you are presenting a complete mar-keting message to your potential fund investors. In the marketing training
program, Kern suggests you follow this four-step process while moving your
prospects through different phases of engaging your ﬁrm:
1.Interest and desire. Provide a white paper, speech, update on your per-
spective of the markets, which catches the attention of your potentialinvestor.144 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
2.Trust . Develop a relationship with the potential investor. Build trust
by providing client quotes, industry recommendations, and comparisonanalytics between your fund and others.
3.Proof . Show proof that your fund has a high pedigree team, detailed
consistent investment processes in place, and an advantage of some type
which can be tangibly displayed or conﬁrmed.
4.Sample . Allow the investor to start with a small minimum investment,
provide examples of what other investors like them have done in thepast, or present case studies on three different types of typical investors
that you serve so they can imagine being in that position.
The descriptions of these four steps are less important than the pro-
cess itself. If you can grab the attention of the investor, build a relationship
with them, provide proof of your abilities and performance, and then com-
bine that with a sample, you will be several steps ahead of much of yourcompetition.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the strategy of similar others, please type this URLinto your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Marketer
Question : How could we improve our PowerPoint pitch book for in-
vestors?
Answer : This will depend on its current state, your strategy, and your
target investors, but following are a few of the most common tips that I
often provide to fund managers looking to improve their PowerPoint pre-
sentations:
/squaresolidQuarterly update . Most potential investors will have already seen your
one-pager, which is updated monthly. The presentation should mention
your performance but the main purpose of it is to present your team’spedigree, investment process, and risk controls. Hire a professional edi-
tor to spend an hour reviewing the presentation after each major review;
this costs less than $100.
/squaresolidThree areas of focus . As previously indicated, the three areas of focus in
the PowerPoint presentation should be team pedigree and experience,
investment process, and risk controls. Many managers tend to be veryFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 145
high level while describing their investment process and risk controls,
frequently using terms that are seen too often in generic industry pre-sentations. You have to let out enough of your secret sauce in your
marketing materials so that others know there is actually something
there. Solid returns alone, even in these recent markets, are not enough.
You must provide some explanation of your consistent process, system,
and parameters for operating. Here is some advice on each of the three
most important sections of your PowerPoint presentation:
1.Team pedigree. Take the time to describe all of the relevant experi-
ence that your team holds, and try to explain those experiences in
ways that mesh well with your ﬁrm’s investment process and ap-proach to managing risk. Many types of experience can be valuable
to managing a portfolio of investments, but sometimes that connec-
tion needs to be spelled out in the presentation. If after creating this
section you realize that your team consists of just one or two pro-
fessionals without a long industry track record, consider beeﬁng upyour close advisory board with industry veterans and experts in risk
and portfolio management. Many times investors will ask how much
of a fund principal’s own assets are invested in the funds. Regardlessof the exact dollar amount, if 80 to 90 percent or more of your own
liquid assets are invested in this fund, check with your compliance of-
ﬁcer about noting this in your presentation materials. Many investors
turn to hedge funds due to an alignment of interests, and providing
evidence of this in your fund sometimes helps. It is important to re-
tain capital-raising talent as well, but without proper portfolio andrisk management professionals or advisory professionals in place,
you may just spin your wheels. As you expand your team, be sure
to include a team hierarchy tree in your presentation. This may in-clude your advisory team and a few service providers or research
groups with whom you work daily and upon whom you rely for
operations.
2.Investment process. This is most commonly the area of PowerPoint
presentations that needs improvement. I have found it easiest to tryto break your investment process into three to ﬁve steps, which could
then be broken down further during a due diligence phone call or in
meetings with potential investors. I would start with a single pagedisplaying the three- to ﬁve-step investment process your ﬁrm uses,
followed by one to two pages explaining each step of the process
in great detail. Describe the tools you use, the decision-making pro-cess, research inputs, parameters for reﬁning the universe of potential
investments, and triggers that may affect how the portfolio is con-
structed at each step. Following this, consider adding another page146 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
to the PowerPoint on buy and sell decision triggers: When do you
trim a position? When do you sell? When are positions cleared outcompletely? What stop-loss provisions are in place? Providing a few
trading case studies in this part of the PowerPoint may be helpful.
Use real-life examples from the previous quarter and update these
frequently so that analysts will be able to read into your decisions in
context of the recent market conditions.
3.Risk management techniques. Risk management techniques can be
placed in a separate section of the presentation or tacked onto the end
of your investment process section in the PowerPoint. It is hard to
go overboard on explaining with granularity what risk managementtechniques your ﬁrm employs. Start with the status quo: What tools,
research, stop-loss provisions, and systems are used? Next move on
to proprietary models you may be using, exclusive trading research,
or experience that provides additional insight into how you manage
risk in your portfolio.
/squaresolidMore is more. It is often better to go overboard with details on your
investment processes and risk management details than not to provide
enough information. That said, never let the presentation grow to over25 pages unless you have three or more products being presented in
a single presentation. Getting your PowerPoint right is about balanc-
ing transparency and granularity against confusion and informationoverload. Everyone is busy, and often getting someone to invest three
minutes to review your one-pager can be a challenge of its own.
Creating a solid PowerPoint presentation is a task of continual improve-
ment, but if you start with these tips it should set you above 50 percent of
the sub–$200 million hedge funds that we often speak with.
Question : What should we look at while interviewing a third-party
marketer we may hire?
Answer : Evaluating a potential marketer should be as rigorous as
completing a request for proposal (RFP) for an institutional consultant. Apartnership is being formed, and investing time and money with the wrong
professionals can be expensive in terms of both real dollars and opportu-
nity costs. Areas to cover while conducting due diligence on a third-partymarketer include:
/squaresolidPast work experience.
/squaresolidCurrent licensing and broker check.
/squaresolidAsset-raising history throughout their careers.
/squaresolidAsset-raising track record while working together in the ﬁrm.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 147
/squaresolidReferrals from past hedge fund clients.
/squaresolidNumber of years experience.
/squaresolidScope of their distribution channel expertise.
/squaresolidNumber of total current clients.
/squaresolidPotential commitment of time in terms of hours per week and duration
of the contract.
/squaresolidPersonality and culture of the third-party marketing group.
Question : What trends have you seen in terms of the types of investors
now out there in the hedge fund industry?
Answer : What I ﬁnd is that overall, while most marketers’ experiences
are very similar, each investor is different, just as the due diligence processesin different ﬁrms vary. Hedge fund investors typically fall into one of these
four categories:
1.The “Follow me” hedge fund investor. Most of these investors make up
your pool of family, friends, co-workers, and people you interact with
regularly. Usually, these people don’t understand how to perform the
necessary due diligence in making a decision to invest. This group alsotends to make assumptions. For example, if a manager holds a degree
from Harvard or has experience from a top ﬁnancial ﬁrm, this fact alone
would persuade these investors to follow suit, ignoring the probability
of fraud. In addition, they heavily rely on personal acquaintance and
recommendations from either you or someone you may know. If you
ask for a check, and they trust you, this group will most likely give oneto you.
2.The “Send me a prospectus” hedge fund investor. This group is a
bit more sophisticated and conducts a minimum amount of due dili-gence into the manager’s performance. Once they are satisﬁed with the
performance on paper, they will meet with and usually shower the man-
ager with questions regarding every aspect of the fund, including returns,
performance, strategies, and risks. What is written and spoken by the
manager is taken on faith and the information is not properly veriﬁedby the investor.
3.The investigating hedge fund investor. This type of investor is sometimes
considered a nuisance by busy professionals who might be caught off-guard by his questions. Not only will the investor keep the manager’s
number on speed dial, but he will perform due diligence above and
beyond the previous types and will go so far as to understand the entireoperation of the fund as if he were the manager. This type will also
interview members of the manager’s staff and will look into the balance148 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
sheet, cash controls, reporting, and other functions not directly related
to performance.
4.The independent hedge fund investor. The due diligence collected by
this investor is thoroughly reviewed independently. Investors in this cat-
egory know that independent opinions are extremely important. They
will contact the auditor, custodian, and administrator in addition to
the SEC and/or state securities agency. They won’t sign on the dot-
ted line until they are satisﬁed that they have independently veriﬁedeverything that matters, including assets under management, returns,
and even a year-end audit. They fully understand the risks that are
involved.
Nobody likes to be put in a box, but it is important to realize that
the types of investors can vary widely, so you should prepare an array of
marketing materials, from brief one-pagers to very detailed institutional-
quality PowerPoint presentations and third-party analyses for those most
scrutinizing parties. My experience has been that marketing materials that
are ﬁrst built to the highest standard and later summarized into smaller,dumbed-down pieces can be very effective and versatile.
Question : When marketing to ﬁnancial advisers for your hedge fund,
what steps do you need to take dealing with these guys? Is it any differentfrom dealing with family ofﬁces?
Answer : Marketing to ﬁnancial advisers is much different from market-
ing to single and multifamily ofﬁces. Here are the main differences between
the two:
/squaresolidFamily ofﬁces have more established due diligence procedures, often
involving consultants or internal analysts who do nothing but look athedge funds or alternative investment products.
/squaresolidFinancial advisers have lower minimum asset levels for what they willconsider investing. Ninety percent of family ofﬁces only seriously con-
sider investing in hedge funds with at least $75 to $100 million, and
many require $250 $300 million or even $1 billion in assets undermanagement.
/squaresolidFamily ofﬁces are more tight-lipped. It will take more effort to developa relationship, meet in person, and get clear feedback on why a hedgefund is or is not a good ﬁt for what they are looking for.
/squaresolidFamily ofﬁces are harder to identify in the ﬁrst place. Financial advisersare easier to ﬁnd, there are more of them, and they advertise moreopenly. Some family ofﬁces advertise but many stay below the radar,
and some purposely don’t even have a web site.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 149
/squaresolidWhile family ofﬁces service high net worth investors almost exclusively,
many ﬁnancial advisers work with a broad spectrum of client types.This might require more caution by them and by your fund in market-
ing products to them. It might also mean sorting through more ﬁnancial
advisers to ﬁnd one with several HNW clients.
/squaresolidIn my experience, ﬁnancial advisers seem much more sensitive to and
motivated by how they will earn a commission or income from the
transaction, whereas many family ofﬁces charge rich enough fees thatthis is less of an issue.
/squaresolidWhile some ﬁnancial advisers may take 16 to 24 months to really geton board with a relevant hedge fund manager, understand your invest-ment process, and possibly invest, most will come to terms a bit before
then. Family ofﬁces, by contrast, often take 18 to 24 months just to
complete their due diligence and committee meetings; it is a very long
sales process.
/squaresolidBoth family ofﬁces and ﬁnancial advisers require genuine relationship-
building efforts and tenacity.
From a legal standpoint there may be other precautions your fund should
take, but I am not a legal expert so I can’t provide any guidance in that
space.
Question : Richard, from a capital-raising perspective, what would you
say is the time frame to raise money (say $10 million or more) for a small,
start-up hedge fund with no name recognition and with principals who have
no name recognition and no pedigree in the alternative investment world?I would say 12 months at best. What do you think?
Answer : I would say 16 to 20 months would be realistic if they keep
their heads down and have a great team and a solid investment process.Those are big if’s, though—it is easy to get distracted or discouraged. The
ﬁrst fund I marketed took nine months straight of cold-calling, e-mails, and
conferences to raise a single dollar, but after 18 months we were raising
$1 million a week in new assets.
Question : Do you have a quick takeaway lesson that I could apply to my
business development work for our family of hedge funds? There is always
so much to get done and so little time to do it. What advice would you
give us?
Answer : Following is a quote I used recently while speaking with an
investment fund manager who was looking to raise capital. He was doing
so by approaching every investor he could possibly speak to. He was ex-
plaining how his ﬁrm has so few resources compared to their $1 billion
competitors.150 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
You can take a $5 disposable camera and take it out of the box,
stand 10 feet from a building, and take a great picture that will
be developed and look good if not great. You could stand in thatsame position with a $10,000 camera with every gadget, lens, and
a tripod, and it will not take as good a picture if you do not do one
thing: Focus.
—Brian Tracy
The point: You can beat your competition with a smaller staff, less ﬁ-
nancial resource, and less experience if you just learn to focus. Focus on
your top prospective investors, focus on local potential investors, and focusexclusively on the types of investors that are most likely to make allocations
to your fund. If you can dial in on these three areas—your hot prospect
list, local investors, and the right investor mix (family ofﬁces, wealth man-
agement, pension funds, etc.)—then you can really cover a lot of ground
quickly.
Question : For this question and answer exchange I actually went to
an outside expert, Richard Dukas from Dukas PR, who works with many
medium- and large-size hedge fund managers, and I asked him: Why shouldhedge funds invest in PR, especially when their ability to speak with the
press is restricted by law in many places?
Answer : Presently, most new hedge funds are launched with money
from friends and family, while more established players can launch new
funds from a pool of existing investors. Hedge funds are prohibited from
advertising and marketing. (Once contacted by a potential investor, a hedgefund can send out marketing material.) Thus, in order to attract new in-
vestors, hedge funds need to ﬁnd a way to get their name out there. One
way, of course, is through the media.
Most ﬁnancial journalists have contact with a hedge fund manager or
two. These managers are excellent sources of information, though much of
it is negatively directed toward companies. As such, much of the back-and-
forth between the media and hedge fund managers is off the record. The
SEC’s new rules, however, are aimed at transparency. With competition
among hedge funds ﬁerce, it certainly behooves hedge fund managers to use
their investment expertise to help the public, and drum up investors in the
process.
Most hedge fund managers are still extremely reticent when it comes to
speaking to the media. What I’ve found is that it’s very difﬁcult to solicit
managers to work with a PR ﬁrm.
Dukas says that the reticence comes from a feeling that hedge fund
managers should be secretive and not share their ideas with anyone but
their own investors. However, the new SEC regulations, combined with theFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 151
movement toward activist investing, may change that. Maybe [hedge fund
managers will realize] what they’re doing is not so secretive after all.
As an example of a hedge fund that has embraced the concept of working
with the media, look no further than our client Haven Advisors, which has
racked up considerable press over the past few years.
I mentioned that competition among hedge fund managers is ﬁerce, and
it’s not going to get easier. For example, Janus Capital, one of the world’s
largest mutual fund managers, recently launched a long/short mutual fundwith the goal of absolute return. In other words, Janus is offering investors
access to a mutual fund that acts in the same way that most hedge funds act,
but without the stiff management fees. More mutual funds such as the onelaunched by Janus should hit the market this year, opening up a whole new
pool of investors to the idea of hedge funds. The biggest reason, however, I
feel that hedge fund managers need PR people is the rise of activist investing.
Activist investing is not new, but for whatever reason, hedge funds
ratcheted up what we call “cage rattling” last year. The normal sequencegoes something like this:
1.A hedge fund builds up a large stake in a company by buying stock on
the open market because the fund feels the stock is undervalued.
2.The fund approaches management and the board of the company and
offers suggestions about how to unlock the value of the stock.
3.Management and the board ignore the fund, though in a noncombative
way.
4.The hedge fund gets tired of being jerked away, and publicizes its cage
rattling through an SEC ﬁling (usually attaching letters that it has sent
the company’s management and board).
In some cases, companies capitulate, mostly because other investors
have latched onto the ideas put forth by hedge funds and begun demand-
ing change. In other cases, companies will battle hedge funds, hoping to
eventually shake them out as investors. Regardless of the eventual outcome,
hedge funds need public relations people because companies inherently have
a public relations machine built into their organization. While hedge fundmanagers complain in SEC ﬁlings and on conference calls, companies are
utilizing their public relations resources to work the media and investors.
One good example of the company-versus-fund public relations mentality isTime Warner.
Last year, billionaire corporate raider Carl Icahn built a more than 3
percent stake in Time Warner. In doing so, Icahn began demanding a numberof changes, including a massive stock buyback and a better monetization
of Time Warner’s AOL asset. Time Warner gave in partly, announcing a
$12.5 billion stock repurchase. (Stock repurchases help companies boost152 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
earnings by giving existing shareholders more equity for their shares, that
is, existing shares become more valuable because there are fewer sharesoutstanding when the company buys back stock.) Time Warner, however,
didn’t do everything that Icahn asked.
When Time Warner announced a wide-ranging pact with Google, Icahn
was seemingly furious, warning the company ahead of the deal that it was
making a mistake. Time Warner, with its PR machine in full gear, basically
blew off Icahn, who was working the media in his own way. The end resultwas a deal that Time Warner wanted and was generally hailed for, and a
deal that Icahn apparently hates. At last check, Icahn was having difﬁculty
ﬁnding potential candidates for a reconstituted board that he wants to installat Time Warner. Negative PR toward Icahn, no doubt, has contributed to
this difﬁculty.
The main point to take home here is that there are public relations
strategies and campaigns which hedge fund managers can keep in mind and
follow. There are ethical and legal ways to promote or position a fund; itjust takes someone who has been there before to accomplish this.
Question: How are in-house hedge fund marketers typically compen-
sated?
Answer : There are half a dozen models for compensating in-house mar-
keters, but typically it is structured around a relatively low base salary
combined with a small percentage of fees from new assets raised and trails
from assets raised over the past two to ﬁve years. For example, a junior to
mid-level marketer may be paid a $52,000 base salary, receive 5 percent of
fees on new assets raised this year, and receive 3 percent of fees from assetsraised over the past ﬁve years. All of this may change drastically based on
the size of the hedge fund, the investor distribution channel targeted, the
track record of the fund, and the typical sales cycle and allocation sizes thatthe fund has recently experienced over the past two years. Some marketers,
if deeply experienced, ask for an equity partnership in the hedge fund to be
vested after two to four years, assuming they raise enough capital to push
them past a certain threshold set in the employment contract. This is most
likely the case with small- to medium-size hedge funds, which cannot affordto otherwise pay for this type of help.
Question : I have done a lot of cold-calling for the hedge fund I am
marketing. Do you have any cold-calling-related advice or tips, either for usas a team or for me individually?
Answer : Yes, I do have some tips, seven of which come immediately
to mind:
1.Don’t ask the prospect, “How are you doing?” You don’t care how
they are doing. If you cared you would have done some research on theFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 153
company ﬁrst and you would have something more intelligent to ask
them. This might sound harsh but it is true. Do your homework ﬁrst.
2.Keep in mind that thousands of people cold-call and several people are
probably calling the same or very similar prospects as the ones you
are approaching. Everyone plays the numbers game, and it is natural to
have your calls or e-mails go unanswered. The goal is to develop enough
perceived value so they will take your call the next time or call you when
they are ready to buy your product or service.
3.Shoot for 30 to 80 phone calls a day. More is not always better, but
trying to do 6 to 10 calls an hour will keep you on your toes and always
dialing more prospects. Create a game out of the process.
4.Smile while you dial. The tone of your voice and word choice both
change based on your own feelings and facial expressions. Be happy
and love your job, and the people on the other end of the phone will
take notice.
5.Call the CEO. Always call the CEO. They are the masters of every other
department and if a call or e-mail gets forwarded from them down to
a vice president or department manager, it is much more likely to get
responded to than coming in through an analyst or associate with theﬁrm.
6.Set the table. This is a point Brian Tracy makes in the book, Eat That
Frog (Berrett-Koehler, 2007). Sit down every night and take 20 minutes
to plan out your work for the next day. Break the day into 30-minute
sessions of complete focus, completing your most important tasks before
most people even get to work in the morning.
7.Prepare a standard e-mail that you send out before you call. Anyone
can send a great follow-up e-mail to a phone call—the trick is getting
the prospect on the phone in the ﬁrst place. Don’t have them refuseto take your call because they do not know who you are. E-mail the
prospect ﬁrst, introducing yourself and stating, in three to ﬁve sentences
or less, why you would like to have a ﬁve-minute conversation. Then
call 10 minutes after sending the e-mail out.
What is interesting about making all of these phone calls is listening to
how differently people sound and react during these conversations.
I remember one day last year I called someone who was unqualiﬁed.
It turned out that their company didn’t even provide the type of service I
was hoping to discuss. I made a joke about sending him a personal check or
Paypal payment to provide me with the type of contact I needed to connectwith, and it worked. I was not trying to be manipulative by forcing myself
to be funny to get information, I just made a dumb joke. Even after this was
obvious, this individual asked me what I needed and ended up connecting154 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
me with a very valuable contact. He also asked where I lived, where I grew
up, and if I had a wife or any kids. I was shocked, not while talking tohim but after I hung up. In eight months of making over 600 phone calls,
I had never once had someone be so friendly and up-front like that. It was
a refreshing change from the monotone burnt-out tone of voice I usually
end up listening to. What is important is not what happened during this
phone call but after I realized how valuable a contact he had given me. I felt
strongly obligated to thank him or repay him in some way.
This has taught me to always see the humor in situations and give value
away freely to those in need of help.
One last unrelated sales phone call lesson I have learned is that if you
have highly qualiﬁed the endperson that you are trying to reach, they will be
happy to talk to you because your service is relevant to them and necessary
for their success.
Question : What advice can you give me about networking with investors
and other hedge fund managers?
Answer : The best part about writing in HedgeFundBlogger.com each
day is getting the 200 to 300 e-mails a day from hedge fund professionals,
investors, and students in ﬁnance. One of the most frequent questions I getis “Can you help our hedge fund raise capital from new investors?” I usually
refer these people on to others, as the ﬁrm I am with already has our hands
full in raising capital right now for a set number of funds.
I recently read a quote, though, from Woody Allen: “Eighty percent of
success in life is simply showing up.” Show up at your local CHP and hedge
fund association meetings. Meet face-to-face with local ﬁnancial advisers,institutional consultants, and foundations. We are looking for something
more out of our jobs than a simple paycheck, and if your fund offers potential
investors something in the parameters of what they are allowed to choose,they might choose your product simply because of your relationship. My
favorite sales author, Jeffrey Gitomer, always says that “all things being
equal, people like to do business with their friends . . . and all things not
being equal, people still like to do business with their friends.” My quick
advice to most funds is to make sure your compliance details are in orderand then start showing up everywhere you can to start building long-term,
multiyear relationships in the industry. Maybe even join the Hedge Fund
Group for free and start networking there.
Question : Why is capital raising so difﬁcult?
Answer : Here’s one take:
/squaresolidForty-four percent of all salespeople quit trying after the ﬁrst call.
/squaresolidTwenty-four percent quit after the second call.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 155
/squaresolidFourteen percent quit after the third call.
/squaresolidTwelve percent quit trying to sell their prospect after the fourth call.
This means 94 percent of salespeople quit before the ﬁfth phone call,
while 60 percent of all sales are made after the fourth call. This means that
the overwhelming majority of hedge fund sales professionals don’t even give
themselves a shot at selling their products.
Question: Do you have any advice for creating a contract to work with
a third-party marketer? This is our ﬁrst time going through this process.
Answer : If you are hiring a third-party marketer for the ﬁrst time, move
slowly. Meet with your legal counsel before you even begin to speak with
third-party marketing ﬁrms so that you know what questions to ask up front.
If possible have a contract you would prefer to work under on hand so you
do not have to take their contract and modify it to your needs. Interview and
meet face-to-face with several third-party marketers who have references andtrack records of raising assets so you can start to pick out the smooth talkers
from those with real evidence of having successfully raised capital. Typically
it is a bad idea to pay front-heavy partnership fees or service initiation fees,but it is relatively common to pay some sort of ongoing monthly or quarterly
retainer to those ﬁrms that are spending time on marketing your fund every
day. If you would like to learn more about third-party marketing beforemoving forward, please see ThirdPartyMarketing.com for hundreds of free
related tips, articles, and resources.
Question: What is the difference between brokers, third-party mar-
keters, and capital introduction professionals?
Answer : All three types of professionals raise capital for hedge funds.
Brokers can sometimes be third-party marketers, but the term usually refersto more generic capital connectors or networkers in the industry who may
be accustomed to being paid small lump sums instead of a small percentage
of the management and performance fees over time. Third-party marketers
are independent capital raisers who use their Rolodex and reﬁned capital-
raising processes to raise the AUM levels of several fund managers at any
given time. Third-party marketers work with hedge funds, but they also
may represent mutual funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), private equity
groups, real estate investment trusts (REITs), and so on. Capital introductionteams are typically run inside of investment banks, trading houses, and prime
brokerage shops. These cap intro teams, as they are often called, raise capital
for their fund clients in an effort to keep them on their trading platform. Thelonger the fund remains trading in the platform, the more fees are generated
for the trading ﬁrm that supports them.156 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
HEDGE FUND CAREERS
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on how to start a hedge fund career, please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Career
Question : How important is ethics or ethical policies in the hedge fund
industry?
Answer : It’s important. In the hedge fund industry you have one name
and one reputation. If you ruin that, you could have inﬂuential people inthe industry refusing to do business with you for 15 to 20 years after their
initial opinion is formed. In such a competitive, close-to-the-vest industry
where large proﬁts can be made, the temptation to cut corners or look pastﬁduciary duties is sometimes too much.
The FBI recently had agents posing as a Florida-based hedge fund man-
ager to nab 10 individuals in ﬁve kickback schemes connected to securitiessales. The SEC charged 10 individuals and the U.S. Attorney’s ofﬁce charged
six with criminal offenses.
In each case, the posing hedge fund manager told the targets that their
actions must be kept secret because they violated his ﬁduciary duties, making
it explicitly known that what was going on was illegal and unethical. “This
case illustrates the Commission’s ability to work together with criminalauthorities in creative ways to uncover fraudulent schemes and to protect
our markets,” Linda Chatman Thomas, the head of the SEC’s enforcement
division, said.
Bottom line: If you are smart enough and hardworking enough to be
successful, then you don’t ever need to cut corners and blatantly breaksecurities laws. Innovation and relationships are the competitive advantages
that should make you extremely proﬁtable, not cheating the system.
Question: Is there a professional training or certiﬁcation program for
hedge fund professionals?
Answer : Yes, for professional training programs of many types please
visit HedgeFundTraining.com. This web site provides information onvarious hedge fund training programs available, including e-learning,
DVD/workbook training, and seminar-based training for hedge fund in-
dustry professionals. For the hedge fund industry certiﬁcation program,Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 157
the Certiﬁed Hedge Fund Professional (CHP) Designation, please visit
http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the credibility and global recognition of the
CHP Designation, please type this URL into your Web browser:
http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Credibility
Question: How do I get started working in the hedge fund industry?
Answer : There are many steps to starting a hedge fund career. Here are
six of the ﬁrst ones you should take:
1.The ﬁrst thing you need to do to start a career in the industry is to read
as much as you can about what is going on, how hedge funds operate,and where you may ﬁt in. You will waste your own time and others’
if you do not complete this ﬁrst step. To learn as much as possible in
a single month, read four to ﬁve books, subscribe to four or ﬁve freenewsletters on hedge funds, and register for daily Google Alerts as well.
Make sure to read at least two books on hedge fund careers and at least
two books on hedge funds as an industry.
2.Finding an area in the industry that is a realistic entry point, includes
potential work you are passionate about, and draws upon your past
work experience and strengths. Gaining employment is a competitiveprocess in this industry, and you will typically need to show evidence of
commitment and loyalty to get in.
3.Identify two to three hedge fund industry career mentors. Identify a
professor, hedge fund professional, or retired investment industry pro-
fessional who could help provide you with advice and guidance on ev-erything from crafting your resume to interviewing for open positions.
4.Complete one or more internships in the industry. It does not matter
where you are located; there are hedge funds on every continent lookingfor help in completing their trading, potential investor, or competitive
industry research. If you put yourself out there and do not give up, you
will get into the industry and gain internships. At the beginning you mayhave to work for free to gain initial experience.
5.Develop a unique value proposition to potential employers. Reﬂect on
your recently gained knowledge, natural abilities, past work experience,158 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
and education. Decide how you could effectively present that as a great
package to the hedge funds or service providers to whom you are apply-ing for jobs. Do not be generic; come up with speciﬁc skills and abilities
that allow you to stand out.
6.Some skills that stand out to hedge fund managers include quantitative
modeling experience, Ivy League or advanced education, signs of loyalty
or passion, retention of designations such as the CHP Designation, high-
quality names from respected or local hedge funds on your resume, anda stomach for a high commission/proﬁt-sharing type position.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund internships, please type this URL intoyour Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Internships
Question: What are the top mistakes often made by hedge fund career
professionals?
Answer : There are ﬁve mistakes that our team sees hedge fund pro-
fessionals and students making while trying to obtain employment in the
industry. Our team receives over 50,000 career-related e-mails a year, and
these mistakes are what we see most commonly made from this perspective
of the industry:
1.Annoying . Every week we speak with professionals who are very pas-
sionate about working in the hedge fund industry. They will do almost
anything to get a job working for a hedge fund, and they are eager to
show this while networking and during interviews. The problem is that
it can come off as overbearing and desperate. The more successful a
hedge fund or any company is, the busier they typically will be, and
the better the employer they will probably be as well. This means that
the best employers have the least patience for those potential job candi-
dates who send in three to four e-mails a week or leave two voice mailsin a single day regarding open jobs or whether their resume has been
reviewed.
2.Overconﬁdent . One ironic aspect about growing a career or gaining
knowledge on any niche subject is that the more you know, the more
you realize you don’t know very much. In other words, with each new
skills or lesson that you pick up, you are opened to a dozen new skillsFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 159
or lessons that you now realize you will have to master. Experienced
business professionals and hedge fund managers know this, so comingoff as all-knowing, or a master at anything, can often be taken as a sign
of ignorance or a low tolerance for any teaching or instruction that may
be required to complete the job well.
3.Long resumes and e-mails. This goes hand-in-hand with point 1 on not
being annoying, but it so important that I am pulling it out as a separate
point by itself. Many times when you think there are seven or eightimportant reasons why someone should interview or hire you, you may
want to explain all of these in a single two- to three-page e-mail. This
is a huge mistake; these e-mails are instantly deleted. Nobody in theindustry has time to ready 20 essays by potential candidates on why
they should be hired. Keep your e-mails down to three to ﬁve sentences
at most, and be as concise and clear as possible.
4.Generic . Do whatever you can so that you are not generic. Nobody
wants to hire someone who is just okay at many different things. Youmust stand out as being especially detail-oriented, teachable, passionate,
or intelligent. Deﬁne your skill set and unique skills before the interview
so you can ensure that the potential employer remembers them after theinterview.
5.Nothing but passion . We see many professionals trying to enter the
industry with nothing but a business degree and a lot of passion and
desire. That is not enough, and you will fail if that is all you have. You
must work your way into small internships and research projects. You
must always be reading more about hedge funds and the specializedknowledge the job you are aiming for requires.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on top ﬁve hedge fund career mis-
takes, please type this URL into your Web browser: http://
HedgeFundTraining.com/Mistakes
Question : Do you have a system for career development or improvement
that you could share with us who are within our ﬁrst ﬁve to seven years ofour career?
Answer : Yes. There is a formula that I have used over the past seven
years to help me build my resume, career, and now my own small business,160 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
and that is the SKAR formula. This is not a way to shortcut the hard work
it takes to be successful, but rather a map of where you should invest yourenergy to increase the results you get in return.
SKAR Development Formula
Specialized Knowledge +Authority +Results
=Huge growth opportunities and faster development
within your career or business
SKAR Deﬁnitions
/squaresolidSpecialized knowledge means speciﬁc knowledge that is practical, func-
tional, and very niche-speciﬁc to the area within which you work or the
skill or ability you rely on to perform well. Specialized knowledge existswhether you are an airplane pilot, hedge fund analyst, or third-party
marketer. The difference between having specialized knowledge and
not having it could mean the difference between spending 18 months
to complete a task or project and being able to develop strong client
relationships and complete the same task in just three months. Having
specialized knowledge lets you identify more opportunities, move morequickly on them, and execute with efﬁciency. When multiplied over sev-
eral years, this puts you in a different league of competition. Some ideas
on how you can further develop your specialized knowledge include:
/squaresolidRead two books/month for the next two years on the area of spe-
cialized knowledge that is going to beneﬁt your business or career
most.
/squaresolidSubscribe to three of the best newsletters from blogs or experts in your
industry which are notrehashed press releases and garbage news. You
learn close to nothing from reading the news. Instead, read insights,
analyses, and white papers within these newsletters. There are at least
two to three valuable free newsletters in each industry.
/squaresolidComplete a niche training and certiﬁcation program speciﬁc to your
area of specialized knowledge. Having a third party verify that you
have obtained a certain level of specialized knowledge is always going
to be more credible than your own statement that “I like to read books
and e-mail newsletters, here is what I have read lately.” Seek out an
online certiﬁcation program and start one within six months. Thiswill force you to read and learn more within your niche.
/squaresolidWrite one article a week on your thoughts, best practices, and lessonslearned within your niche area of practice. Write anonymously byFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 161
creating a free blog at Blogger.com and start synthesizing what you
are learning and combining other ideas to create your own originalconcepts (such as this blog post).
/squaresolidAuthority means creating structures around your ﬁrm or self so that
your knowledge and abilities are communicated in a way that posi-tions you as an authority in your niche area. Ideally, this area lines
up one-to-one with your area of specialized knowledge, and it can be
the result of gathering this knowledge. Two professionals can hold thesame knowledge, yet while one write ﬁve books and completes over
50 press interviews a year, the other may be an armchair critic with
a small group of ﬁve to seven consulting clients. The better-positionedprofessional will reap rewards from new opportunities coming toward
him, instead of the other way around.
I was a competitive swimmer earlier in my life, and the best book
I read on swimming was called Total Immersion by Terry Laughlin ,
and within the book he uses the phrase “swimming downhill.” It wasa way to swim so that your body is tilted forward and you literally cut
continually downward into the water. If you get authority positioning
right, it will be like you are swimming downhill. Jeffrey Gitomer is agreat study of authority positioning. He started writing eight pages a
day when he was 46 years old; now in his ﬁfties he has more than 10
best-selling books, and charges more than Colin Powell for speeches.The real important detail, though, is he never cold-calls anyone and
never scrambles for new business. His phone literally rings off the hook
with new opportunities, clients, and joint venture partnerships due tohis positioning. He is swimming down a steep hill.
/squaresolidPublish your own newsletter or blog. Even if you only publish some-thing once every two weeks, having it and building it over time iswhat is important.
/squaresolidInterview one professional each month for your own blog or newslet-ter, explaining that you can’t compensate them but as your web site
becomes more popular they may get some exposure, plus they can
have a copy of the recorded phone call transcript, MP3 ﬁle, or docu-ment that you type up. Interviewing experts is a shortcut to gaining
specialized knowledge and authority positioning quickly. Being able
to tell others that you have interviewed 20 of the top experts in the in-dustry and that overall you found A and B and, most surprisingly, C,
is very powerful and carries authority. Note: The more strongly you
have fulﬁlled your work in building specialized knowledge, the morewilling these experts will be to connect with you and the more pointed
and reﬁned your questions will be. Ever done an interview with a
journalist who has never worked in your ﬁeld? Not always fun or162 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
fulﬁlling to answer the basics, which can be looked up on Google in
three seconds.
/squaresolidTake what you have written within your own newsletter or blog and
self-publish a book with 60 to 80 pages of single-spaced text. Anyone
can do this for $15 at Lulu.com. Very simple—no more excuses thatyou do not have a book deal. I got my second big investment mar-
keting contract partially because I had a self-published book in hand
and someone gave me a chance based on my dedication to the niche.
The book positions you as an authority.
/squaresolidCreate a one-page PDF list of all of your past clients. This can showdepth, experience, and respect that others have given you by payingfor your services and time in the past.
/squaresolidSpeak at conferences. It is relatively easy to land speaking spots atconferences, networking events, and seminars. Lots of professionals
are looking for others with unique ideas and lessons to share. And
again, teaching what specialized knowledge you have gained helps youconnect and synthesize these ideas. If you are speaking to a crowd, you
are in an authority position, and when you mention your speaking it
adds credibility because others have stopped their business days andinvested their valuable time to listen to what you have to say.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on authority construction tips, please type this URLinto your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Authority
/squaresolidResults . The importance of showing real, tangible results cannot be over-
stated. Finding ways to do this within service businesses, the fund man-
agement industry, or within certain areas of extreme conﬁdentiality is
challenging. Some types of tangible results that can be shared include:
/squaresolidAn actual printed-out version of part of the service or end result of
the product or service.
/squaresolidVideo (preferred) or text (not as good) testimonials from past and
current clients, the more speciﬁc to the immediate need or concern of
your potential client or employer, the better—and the more numerous
the testimonials, the better.
/squaresolidThe ﬁrst 15 to 20 percent of the product or your service given away
for free on a trial basis. For example, offer a ﬁrst month trial for $1,
four weeks of free work or time so you can prove your worth to theclient, and so on.Frequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 163
/squaresolidDiverse and numerous case studies of past clients or employers. This
proves that you work with ﬁrms with various needs and have foundsolutions for them, and it allows the reader of these case studies to
imagine you solving their problem.
/squaresolidA little tip, quick takeaway, or lesson within your sales letter or web
site which provides the potential client with immediate beneﬁt. This
proves that you have the goods, are an authority, and do have their
best interests in mind.
Another related topic that I don’t have space to go into here is that
underlying all three of these SKAR items is having the right habits. Habitshave been shown to form 96 percent of what we do every single day. We tend
to eat the same things, walk the same way, watch the same shows, and read
the same types of books. As the quote goes, “First you form your habits, andthen your habits form you.” What business habits are you forming? What
elements of the SKAR formula are you using each week? When you read
this type of advice, are you thinking, “I already know this stuff,” or “Howgood am I at that, and where could I improve?”
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on the SKAR formula, please type this URL into yourWeb browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/SKAR
Question: Could you recommend three books on hedge fund careers?
Answer : Yes, to start with you could download a free e-book we offer
on hedge funds online at http://HedgeFundsCareer.com. After that I would
recommend reading Hedge Me by Claude Schwab (Lynx Media, 2006) and
then All About Hedge Funds by Robert Jaeger (McGraw-Hill, 2002). These
books combined will provide you with a good historic background of the
industry, different perspectives on trends affecting hedge fund employment,
and some tips on networking and connecting with hedge fund managers.
Question : I have been trying to get into the hedge fund industry for over
four months now with no real progress. I’m about to give up and I just don’t
know whether there is any hope for someone like me with no Ivy Leagueeducation or experience yet in the industry.
Answer : I made it into the industry and did well with neither of those
resources under my belt. You probably can, too, if you want it badly enough.
Here are some tips for building and keeping a positive attitude for when you164 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
are trying to overcome a challenge such as breaking into the hedge fund
industry. This is what I do for my own goals and business:
/squaresolidI work out at least three times a week.
/squaresolidI have several three- to four-minute motivational podcasts or audio
book clips on my iPod that I can listen to on the way to work.
/squaresolidI read 15 pages of attitude-changing articles or books every morning
while I am eating breakfast (see Jeffrey Gitomer’s Little Gold Book of
YES! Attitude [FT Press, 2006].).
/squaresolidI have created a one-page laminated sheet with the top 50 business and
sales lessons I have learned, and I have posted it in my shower, on my
bathroom mirror, and behind my desk at work. I do my best to readthis list twice a day to remind myself of what is important.
/squaresolidI set BHAGS for myself—big, hairy, audacious goals, as described by Jim
Collins in Good to Great (HarperBusiness, 2001). My current BHAGS?
I want to become theexpert in investment marketing and sales, run 50
investment web sites that rank in the top three slots of Google search
results, and become a best-selling author.
/squaresolidI try to ﬁnd a lesson to be learned from each negative experience. If
nothing else, a negative experience should always tell you something
about yourself.
/squaresolidI am always learning and exploring something new. First, it was get-
ting into Harvard and moving to Boston; now it is learning all I can
about investment marketing and sales, the psychology of inﬂuence, and
Web marketing. As soon as you stop being curious and challenged you
become stale and unmotivated.
/squaresolidI cut off or drastically reduce communication with negative people.
/squaresolidI don’t watch the local news. It is worthless. How often do you see a
news story about a generous church donation, a child winning a scienceproject award, or an organ donor saving someone’s life? Not nearly as
often as a plane crash, ﬁre, or robbery. If you have to get the local news,
read it online for ﬁve minutes and save yourself some time.
Question : What would be your advice regarding third-party marketing?
Is this trend dying out or growing? I am trying to learn more about the
space.
Answer : If you are starting a third-party marketing career you are in
good company: Dozens of highly experienced investment and hedge fund
marketing/sales professionals are entering the industry each year. In termsof total ﬁrms offering services, the industry is growing by over 15 percent
each year. While some professionals may leave an investment manager or
hedge fund to start their own third-party marketing ﬁrm, many more ﬁrstFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 165
work or partner with an existing third-party marketing ﬁrm. The beneﬁts of
starting or working for a third-party marketing ﬁrm are many, and doing ei-ther is relatively easy to do. If you can raise capital and consistently bring in
$100 million to $200 million/year, you can typically eliminate most types of
political and corporate risks while having the potential of earning two to four
times more than you would with the same experience while working for a
large institution such as Morgan Stanley or Goldman Sachs. As the economy
goes through this rough patch and bonuses are skimmed and 50-year old ex-ecutives laid off, I see this trend of third-party marketing start-ups and career
moves increasing. To learn more, please see http://thirdpartymarketing.com.
BONUS VIDEO MODULE
To watch a video on hedge fund marketing careers, please type this
URL into your Web browser: http://HedgeFundTraining.com/Careers
Question: I am a 38-year-old insurance executive and I have always
wanted to work in the hedge fund industry. Do you believe it is too late tomake a career change?
Answer: We get at least one question like this each month from profes-
sionals who work in investment banking, insurance, or corporate ﬁnance.The answer is no, it is not too late. It is an advantage if you have some corpo-
rate best practices training and some skill set that will help a fund manager
grow their business. Oftentimes hedge fund managers need accountants, ﬁ-nancial modelers, capital raisers, project managers, ﬁnancial analysts, and
detail-oriented investment professionals to help move their business forward.
If you can’t get an interview or position with a large hedge fund, make sure
to try meeting with local service providers and small hedge funds start-ups
or emerging hedge funds. A face-to-face meeting is worth 10 phone callswhen it comes to networking.
Question: I am about to enroll in the CHP Designation Program. What
does the program include? What is the process that I will go through?
Answer: The CHP Designation is an online self-study training and cer-
tiﬁcation course on hedge funds. Once you join the program you will be
sent a welcome letter thanking you for registering and providing you withbullet-point steps on how you can attend our networking events, gain ac-
cess to our educational video content (over 100 videos and tools), receive
our career coaching, acquire the required readings, access the mock exam,166 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
schedule your exam, and take advantage of CHP membership beneﬁts. You
then study using the video content, CHP study guide, and required read-ings, using our team as support when you have questions or get stuck
on certain speciﬁc subjects. Your exam is conducted 100 percent online
from wherever you are based. Over 40 percent of our participants com-
plete the CHP Designation from outside of the United States. Learn more at
http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
Question: What are your top tips for those who would like to start a
career in the hedge fund industry? Anything else unique to what you have
already mentioned?
Answer: Yes, here are some additional tips:
/squaresolidBe absolutely sure you actually want to work in the hedge fund industry.
As Yoda said, do or do not, there is no “try.” If you try you will fail,
because this industry is very competitive and it takes dedication and
hard work to do well in the hedge fund industry.
/squaresolidBecome a student of the hedge fund industry. Study the industry every
day by reading magazines, e-mail newsletters, books, and white papers.
You need to speak the language of the industry.
/squaresolidUse the three-circles strategy from Jim Collins. Collins suggests to move
forward only with decisions that are a good ﬁt with your background,
involve something you are passionate about, and have the potential of
being highly proﬁtable. I use this strategy in my own life and you should,too, as you look at opportunities in this ﬁeld.
Question : I am attending your Hedge Fund Premium seminar network-
ing event next month in New York. I have never been to a networking eventbefore and I wanted to see if you had a few quick tips on networking for
me. Anything you can share?
Answer : If you’re looking to enter the hedge fund industry either work-
ing directly for a ﬁrm or as a service provider to one, networking events and
conferences are a great way to get your foot in the door.
Many professionals fail to take advantage of these opportunities, even
those who attend. Here are ﬁve tips that should prepare you for attending a
networking event or conference:
1.Don’t be shy . Attending a hedge fund event is a good start, but you do
not gain anything if you do not talk to other attendees, speakers, and
sponsors. The event is only valuable if you make it valuable, so networkand socialize with those around you.
2.Don’t scare people off . Another mistake is to be too forward when
approaching managers or service providers, especially if you are lookingFrequently Asked Hedge Fund Questions 167
to land a job in the hedge fund industry. Instead of sharing insights and
thoughts on the industry, many young professionals will focus entirelyon their own needs (a job) and ignore those managers or executives
who are not currently hiring. This is the wrong mentality. Assuming
you have been following the industry and paid good attention to the
speaker, you will have a good starting point for initiating a conversation.
Ask questions when appropriate and listen when the other person is
speaking. If you are looking for a job, don’t start a conversation byvoicing that problem. Those who work in the industry are not paying
to hear someone complain about not working in private equity. But you
should mention it when the timing is appropriate.
3.Get your name out there . If you cannot ﬁnd a hiring ﬁrm or no ﬁrms
are interested in your product or service, don’t despair—get your name
out there. It may just be an inconvenient moment or the person you are
talking with is not the right person at the ﬁrm. For example, if you are
marketing your auditing service to a principal in charge of evaluatingdeals, he may not be interested. Give him your business card regardless;
in another quarter the ﬁrm may be looking for a new auditor and still
have your card. Even if you do not directly land a client through thismethod, it boosts your ﬁrm’s or your own name recognition. If you’re
looking for a job (from analyst to executive), give your card out. Then
when the ﬁrm is eventually hiring they will probably have your name
on ﬁle.
4.Prepare an elevator pitch. It may not sound great, but you are a product
that needs to be sold. Therefore you need to have a great elevatorpitch that comes out effortlessly. Whether you are looking to network,
marketing to investors, or job seeking, a solid elevator pitch is necessary.
Be concise and include only essential information.
5.Look and act like a professional. Even though you are not at work
when you’re attending an event or conference, act like you are. You are
meeting potential clients and partners, so you essentially are working.
Wear a suit. If it’s hot, as many crowded events are, at least make the
initial effort and take off your coat once you sit down. Look your best(haircut, shave, and a suit) or no one will take you seriously. It’s better to
be overdressed than underdressed. Remember your manners, especially
if it is a catered event, and use language that you would be comfortableusing in the ofﬁce.
Question : I am looking to work in the third-party marketing space. Do
you have any career advice or book recommendations for those who want
to work in third-party marketing? Do you have advice for getting a job in
this niche industry?168 THE HEDGE FUND BOOK
Answer : There are no great books on third-party marketing that I am
aware of. Everyone is pretty close-to-the-vest in the industry. I haven’t founda great book on investment sales, either, but I know there are a few of those
if you look around on Amazon. If you are looking for great books just on
sales, I really like Jeffrey Gitomer’s three books: The Sales Bible (HarperBusi-
ness, 2008), Little Red Book of Sales Answers (FT Press, 2006), and Little
Gold Book of Yes! Attitude (FT Press, 2006). Those books have changed
my career.
Hedge fund marketing and sales fee structures vary depending on the
type, reputation, and abilities of the third-party marketing (3PM) ﬁrm. Some
retain only two to three clients at a time and charge retainers for this focus oftheir attention, while others might work with 10 money managers (clients) at
once and only get paid on commission. Usually commissions are 20 percent
of both the base fee and performance fee when working with hedge funds.
If you work for a hedge fund, you will be restricted to their strategies,
so if their performance dips or the strategy goes out of favor you might notraise any money and it wouldn’t be your fault. If you work for a 3PM ﬁrm,
you would probably get to market two to three different money managers
in some capacity across diverse distribution channels such as endowmentsand foundations, broker-dealers, and directly to high net worth individuals.
If a strategy goes out of favor, you just ﬁnd a new money manager to
market as a ﬁrm, and you avoid the downside of being a hedge fund sales
professional. Common compensation for internal hedge fund salespeople is
$80,000 to $200,000 with some making $400,000 to $800,000 per year
and maybe three to 10 commissions that might trail off over time. Commoncompensation for a 3PM, as I mentioned earlier, is a retainer of $60,000 to
$150,000 (if they get one) plus 20 percent of fees.
I’m not even 40 years old yet, and I went the third-party marketing
route because I want to be able to have knowledge of the DNA and powerful
relationships in every major distribution channel, and I want to ﬁgure out
where the real money and momentum are and be able to shift my focus to
that point. I believe it is harder to get a 3PM job because most want you to
have a book of business or solid relationships, but it can be done. In my ﬁrstthird-party marketing position I worked for free for three weeks to prove
myself, and I took a big cut in pay coming in the door, but it was worth it
to learn so much in so little time. Invest in yourself for the long term, nevertake ethical shortcuts in this industry, and you will do well.APPENDIX A
Bonuses of $1,779
The following is a list of book bonuses that we have negotiated or set
up on behalf of readers of this book. By purchasing this book you have
supported our organization, so in return we would like to provide you withthese bonuses.
CHP Designation Tuition Discount: To thank those who have pur-
chased this book, the Hedge Fund Group can offer $100 off regis-tration for the CHP Designation Program when you register for theCHP Level 1 and Level 2 Combination Package on our web site.
Registration for the program opens just twice a year, on January
15 and July 15. Learn more at http://HedgeFundCertiﬁcation.com.
Value of discount: $100.
InvestorDatabases.com: Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of your receipt
for purchasing this book and receive 30 percent off your ﬁrst pur-chase made at InvestorDatabases.com. Investor Databases provides
over a dozen databases that include complete contact details for
funds of hedge funds, family ofﬁces, wealth management ﬁrms,
endowment funds, institutional consultants, and more. Value of
discount: $800+.
HedgeFundPremium.com : Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of your
receipt for purchasing this book and receive three months’ freeaccess to HedgeFundPremium.com and a lifetime membership
rate of just $12/month instead of the public price of $27/month.
HedgeFundPremium.com is an exclusive membership program
for hedge fund professionals. Members gain access to exclusive
video content, workbooks, job connector tools, and capital-raising
resources. Value of discount: $200+ (ﬁrst-year value).
Hedge Fund Marketing Mechanics: Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of
your receipt for purchasing this book and receive 40 percent off
169The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 170 APPENDIX A: BONUSES OF $1,779
this package, which provides best practices, overlooked opportu-
nities, strategies, and unique techniques to raise more capital foryour hedge fund. Learn more at HedgeFundMarketingMechanics
.com. Value of discount : $250+(ﬁrst-year value).
HedgeFundTraining.com : Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of your receipt
for purchasing this book and receive $50 off any hedge fund au-
dio program, training session, webinar, seminar, or DVD package.
Value of discount : $100.
HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com : Fax, e-mail, or mail us a copy of
your receipt for purchasing this book and receive 30 percent off
your ﬁrst purchase made at HedgeFundInvestorDirectory.com. The
Hedge Fund Investor Directory was constructed by the Hedge Fund
Group, the largest networking association in the hedge fund in-dustry. The Hedge Fund Investor Directory provides contact de-
tails for more than 2,000 unique institutions that typically invest
in hedge fund managers. Explore the packages we offer at http://HedgeFundInvestorDirectory/Buy.html. Value of discount : $329.APPENDIX B
Example Due Diligence Questions
QUESTIONNAIRE
Investment Adviser
Request for Information
A.Corporate Background
1.Name and address of ﬁrm.
2.Principal contact.
3.When was your ﬁrm founded?
4.Is your ﬁrm a registered investment adviser? A commodity trading
adviser? A commodity pool operator?
5.Is your ﬁrm afﬁliated with a broker-dealer?
6.What is the organizational structure of your ﬁrm?
7.Have there been any material organizational changes in the past ﬁveyears?
8.What is the current number of employees at your ﬁrm? Please pro-
vide a breakdown by category.
a.Portfolio managers:
b.Research analysts:
c.Client services:
d.Administration:
e.Other:
9.Please provide a breakdown of your ﬁrm’s assets under management
for the following time periods:
Year Assets # Accounts
1992
1993
19941995
1996
1997
171The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 172 APPENDIX B: EXAMPLE DUE DILIGENCE QUESTIONS
1998
1999
2000
20012002
2003
20042005
2006
20072008
2009
2010
10. Please list the number of accounts/assets gained/lost during the fol-
lowing periods:
Year Accounts
Gained Assets
Gained AccountsLost Assets
Lost
19981999
2000
20012002
2003
20042005
2006
20072008
2009
2010
11. Please list all states in which your ﬁrm is currently registered to
conduct advisory business.
12. What backup technology measures are in place to ensure the in-
tegrity of account access and information? What are your disaster
retrieval procedures?a.Security:
b.Disaster recovery:Appendix B: Example Due Diligence Questions 173
B.Legal and Compliance
1.Please detail your ﬁrm’s ﬁdelity bonding and errors and omissions
(E&O) and directors and ofﬁcers (D&O) coverage (underwriter,
limitations, deﬁnitions, and claims history).
2.Please describe all litigation, arbitration, and self-regulatory orga-
nization (SRO)/regulatory violations involving the ﬁrm, principals,
portfolio managers, traders, and any professional support staff inthe past 10 years.
3.Please list all NASD broker-dealers with whom your ﬁrm works.
4.Who has custody of your accounts? Please detail.
5.What is the procedure for reviewing new accounts?
6.Describe the ﬂow of client funds from the initial deposit with your
ﬁrm to the placement at the custodian.
7.Are regular internal audits performed? If yes, please detail the
frequency and process.
8.Please outline management control procedures.
C.Investment Methodology
1.Please describe your ﬁrm’s investment methodology for asset
allocation and/or market timing that is utilized by your program.
2.What technical and/or fundamental indicators does the program
utilize? Please provide a description of the portfolio models and
indicators tracked.
3.Please list the asset classes in your investment models.
4.Are guidelines in place to prevent undue concentrations? If so, please
detail.
5.Describe the process of selecting an investment for use in a model.
Does an investment committee review these investments? If yes, who
makes up the committee?
6.How are client risk tolerance and objectives incorporated into the
investment decision-making process?
7.How often is client information updated to ensure that the risk
tolerance and objectives are still applicable?
8.How are buy/sell decisions made?
9.What factors determine whether an investment is rated aggressive,
conservative, and so on?
10. What resources are devoted to internal research? Are external
sources used?
11. What professional standards are required of the research staff (i.e.,
experience, CFA, MBA, etc.)?
12. Describe the frequency and process for adjusting the asset allocation
mix. How are these adjustments implemented?174 APPENDIX B: EXAMPLE DUE DILIGENCE QUESTIONS
13. Does your ﬁrm automatically rebalance portfolios? If so, on what
basis?
14. What are the criteria for reallocation and rebalancing a port-
folio?
15. Do clients have the option to purchase securities that are not part
of the investment model? If so, is this portion of the portfolio
segregated?
16. For market timers/asset allocators: How many switches are there in
an average year?
17. For private portfolio managers: What is the turnover rate of
portfolios? Average number of holdings?
18. What percentage of the time do you anticipate being invested in the
markets for each investment discipline managed by your ﬁrm?
19. Please detail all changes in investment philosophy since inception.
20. What professional standards are required of your portfolio man-
agers to manage client funds (i.e., experience, CFA, MBA, etc.)?
D.Fee Structure
1.Please describe in detail your fee structure and sharing arrange-
ments, including billing process. Describe your policy concerning
working with broker-dealers, as well as your policy relative to
representatives or solicitors terminating their relationship with thebroker-dealer.
2.Are the fees charged comparable to those charged by similar ser-
vices?
3.What is the refund policy should a client opt not to continue to
employ your services?
4.Please detail all client costs, including transaction fees and custody
expenses.
5.Are load funds incorporated in the models, and if so, are the
commissions offset?
6.Are direct participation plans utilized in any of these models? If so,
how is the market value of these securities valued for purposes ofbilling?
E.Performance Record
1.Please provide a detailed explanation related to the basis of
presentation relative to your performance record. Please ensure
that this information addresses the following topics: gross or net ofmanagement fees, and actual accounts versus hypothetical. If actual
accounts are used, please explain the reason for their inclusion in
the composite.Appendix B: Example Due Diligence Questions 175
2.Is this performance record the result of any linkage with a prior
ﬁrm or entity? If yes, provide the date when the current ﬁrm’sperformance begins and any differences between the investment
methodologies.
3.Has an independent third party veriﬁed your track record? If yes,
who?
4.Are the personnel responsible for your performance record still with
your ﬁrm? If not, how has this affected your ﬁrm?
5.Please provide a quarter-by-quarter performance composite (gross
and net of advisory fees) for at least 10 years (if available) for
your portfolio. Is this composite AIMR compliant? What level ofAIMR compliance (Level I or Level II)? Please provide your AIMR
disclosure language along with the composite return information.
F.Client Notiﬁcation
1.Do your statements satisfy ERISA guidelines?
2.Which indexes, if any, are included with the statements?
3.With what frequency are the statements generated?
4.Does your ﬁrm provide tax reporting beyond the 1099 reporting
provided by the custodian?APPENDIX C
Top Hedge Fund Web Sites
Following is a list of top hedge fund and alternative investment web sites
run by our team and others that was ﬁrst published by HedgeFundBlogger
.com.
HedgeFundBlogger.com: The number one most popular web site on
the topic of hedge funds with over 5,000 free-to-access videos, arti-
cles, resources, guides, interviews, and e-books. You may ﬁnd many
resources here that you would have to pay a subscription for else-where. (http://HedgeFundBlogger.com)
Albourne Village : Great job board, news feeds, community announce-
ments, and educational white papers as well. This is one of the
oldest and most well-rounded web sites in the hedge fund industry.
(http://Village.Albourne.com)
HedgeFundsCareer.com : Detailed advice, interviews, Q&A, and train-
ing information related to starting and growing a career in the hedge
fund industry. (http://HedgeFundsCareer.com)
FINalternatives : Great well-rounded news web site on alternative invest-
ments in general. This web site is not exclusively focused on hedge
funds, but it does discuss them daily in its original news reports.
(www.ﬁnalternatives.com)
Hedge Fund Blogspot by Veryan Allen: In-depth analytical takes on re-
cent hedge fund industry trends and challenges. Veryan provides aunique view of the industry as a risk portfolio management consul-
tant. (http://hedgefund.blogspot.com)
SEC Guide to Hedge Funds: A must-read web site for anyone who is
starting to complete research on hedge funds as potential invest-
ments. (www.sec.gov/answers/hedge.htm)
ThirdPartyMarketing.com: The only free-to-access educational web
site on capital raising, fund marketing, and third-party marketing
177The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 178 APPENDIX C: TOP HEDGE FUND WEB SITES
that provides consulting advice to both marketers and fund man-
agers. The web site hosts over 250 resources, articles, and videos.(http://ThirdPartyMarketing.com)
New York Times DealBook: Hedge Funds : This blog is hosted by the
New York Times and covers developing hedge fund stories each day.
Great place to get some insight and opinion on top of the regular
news. (http://dealbook.blogs.nytimes.com/category/hedge-funds/)
Hedge Fund Startup Guru.com : Articles and videos for emerging hedge
fund managers, new hedge fund start-ups, and traders who are
considering launching a new fund. (http://HedgeFundStartupGuru.
com)
Investopedia on Hedge Funds : This web site provides over a dozen ed-
ucational articles of more than 800 words each on hedge funds.It reads like a short magazine on long-term hedge fund indus-
try facts, statistics, and trends. (www.investopedia.com/terms/h/
hedgefund.asp)
Family Ofﬁces Group : The educational web site of the largest fam-
ily ofﬁce networking association in the wealth management in-dustry. It contains over 500 articles and videos on family ofﬁces.
(http://FamilyOfﬁcesGroup.com)
Hedge Funds Research Guide, Harvard Baker Library : A great resource
put together by Harvard University on hedge funds. It is a bit
dated now but still holds valuable leads to additional resources.
(www.library.hbs.edu/guides/hedgefunds/index
print.html)
HedgeFundMessageBoard.com : Industry forum for hedge fund pro-
fessionals and hedge fund managers. (http://HedgeFundMessageBoard.com)
PrimeBrokerageGuide.com: The number one web site on the hedge fund
prime brokerage niche industry. (http://primebrokerageguide.com)Glossary
Following is a list of top hedge fund and alternative investment terms and
keywords that are important to understand if you are going to work in
the hedge fund industry.
alpha Alpha goes a step further than excess return and adds risk to the equation.
Alpha is the portfolio’s risk-adjusted performance or the “value added” pro-
vided by a manager. Mathematically, alpha is the incremental difference between
a manager’s actual results and his expected results, given the level of risk. A pos-
itive alpha indicates that a portfolio has produced returns above the expected
level—at the same level of risk—and a negative alpha suggests the portfolio
underperformed given the level of risk assumed.
back ofﬁce The back ofﬁce staff deal with trade processing, reconciliation, and cash
management. They also perform administrative functions that support the trad-ing of securities, including record keeping, trade conﬁrmation, trade settlement,
and regulatory compliance. If used in sales, the back ofﬁce fulﬁlls customers’
orders and may usually perform the duties involved in customer support call
centers.
beta Beta is a measure of sensitivity to the market benchmark, or how volatile
a security or portfolio is relative to the whole market. A diversiﬁed portfoliowith a beta of 1.0 would indicate that the portfolio would respond in tandem
with the market. A beta greater than 1.0 indicates that a portfolio would be
more responsive to market movements, while a beta below 1.0 would indicate a
muted response. Aggressive investors may choose portfolios with higher betas,
while defensive investors may focus on low-beta investments.
broker A broker acts as an agent or intermediary for a buyer and a seller. The buyer,
seller, and broker may all be individuals, or one or more may be a business orother institution. For example, a stockbroker works for a brokerage ﬁrm and
handles client orders to buy or sell stocks, bonds, commodities, and options in
return for a commission or asset-based fee. A ﬂoor broker handles buy and sell
orders on the ﬂoor of a securities or commodities exchange. A real estate broker
represents the seller in a real estate transaction and receives a commission on
the sale.
buy side The buy side consists of institutional investors, which includes insurance
companies, mutual funds, pension funds, endowment funds, and hedge funds.
The buy side refers to ﬁrms that buy and sell as customers of these market
makers, usually taking speculative positions or making relative value trades.
179The Hedge Fund  Book:  A Trainin g Manual for 
Professionals an d Capital- Raisin g Executives  
by Rich ard C . Wilson 
Copyright © 2010 Rich ard C . Wilson 180 GLOSSARY
Calmar and Sterling ratios Calmar and Sterling ratios are well suited for presenting
the worst-case picture since they take into account maximum drawdown—that
is, the worst possible losing streak. This feature causes them to be used exten-sively in hedge fund applications.
capital introduction services This is a process whereby the prime broker attempts
to introduce its hedge fund clients to qualiﬁed hedge fund investors who have
an interest in exploring new opportunities to make hedge fund investments.
chief compliance ofﬁcer (CCO) A CCO is primarily responsible for overseeing
and managing compliance issues in an organization. The responsibilities ofthe position often include leading enterprise compliance efforts; designing and
implementing internal controls, policies, and procedures to assure compliance
with applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations and third-party
guidelines; managing audits and investigations into regulatory and compliance
issues; and responding to requests for information from regulatory bodies.
clearing Clearing denotes all activities from the time a commitment is made for
a transaction until it is settled. It involves the management of post-trading,
presettlement credit exposures to ensure that trades are settled in accordance
with market rules, even if a buyer or seller should become insolvent prior to
settlement.
Commodities and Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) The Commodities and
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) is an independent agency of the U.S.
government. The main objectives of the CFTC are to protect market users and
the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices related to the sale of
commodity and ﬁnancial futures and options; and to foster open, competitive,
and ﬁnancially sound futures and option markets.
custodian A custodian is a ﬁnancial institution responsible for safeguarding a ﬁrm’s
or individual’s ﬁnancial assets. The role of a custodian in such a case would be
the following: to hold in safekeeping assets such as equities and bonds, arrange
settlement of any purchases and sales of such securities, collect information on
and income from such assets, provide information on the underlying companies
and their annual general meetings, manage cash transactions, perform foreign
exchange transactions where required, and provide regular reporting on all their
activities to their clients.
dark pool Dark pools offer institutional investors liquidity that is not displayed
on order books. This is useful for traders who wish to move large numbers of
shares without revealing themselves to the open market.
dealer A dealer is an individual or a ﬁrm that buys assets for and sells assets from
its own portfolio, as opposed to bringing buyers and sellers together. Dealers, or
principals, buy and sell securities for their own accounts, adding liquidity to the
marketplace and seeking to proﬁt from the spread between the prices at which
they buy and sell. Dealers are sometimes able to offer investors better prices,
but they may tend to make recommendations based on their own ownership
positions.
drawdown A drawdown is measured from the time a retrenchment begins to when a
new high is reached. This method is used because a valley can’t be measured untilGlossary 181
a new high occurs. Once the new high is reached, the percentage change from
the old high to the smallest trough is recorded. Drawdowns help determine
an investment’s ﬁnancial risk. An analyst can use this as a tool to compare asecurity’s possible reward to its risk.
execution Execution is the act of ﬁlling an order to buy or sell a security. That is,
when a broker executes an order, he actually makes a trade on behalf of the
client. The date of execution is known as the trade date.
front ofﬁce The front ofﬁce deals with the positioning of trade, hedging, and value
at risk (VAR). The primary objective is to trade actively and manage liquidity.
fund administration services Fund administration services are a set of activities that
are carried out in support of the actual process of running a hedge fund. Services
include the calculation of the net asset value (NAV), including the calculation of
the fund’s income and expense accruals, preparation of semiannual and annual
accounts, maintenance of the fund’s ﬁnancial books and records, payment of
the fund’s expenses, and supervision of the orderly liquidation and dissolution
of the fund.
fund of hedge funds A fund of hedge funds is an investment company that invests
in hedge funds rather than in individual securities. Some funds of hedge funds
register their securities with the SEC. These funds of hedge funds must provide
investors with a prospectus and must ﬁle certain reports quarterly with the SEC.
They hold a diversiﬁed portfolio of generally uncorrelated hedge funds that may
be widely diversiﬁed or focused on a speciﬁc sector or geographical location.
hedge fund Hedge funds pool the investors’ money and invest in ﬁnancial instru-
ments in order to make positive returns. They pursue absolute returns on their
underlying instruments. Every hedge fund has its own investment strategy that
determines the type of investments and the methods of investment it undertakes.
There are over 14 different investment strategies in which hedge funds invest,
and each has its own risk and return. Hedge funds, as a class, invest in a broad
range of investments including shares, debt, and commodities. They are able to
take speculative positions in derivative securities such as options and have the
ability to short-sell stocks. This will typically increase the leverage—and thus
the risk—of the fund. This also means that it’s possible for hedge funds to
make money when the market is falling. Hedge funds are only available to a
speciﬁc group of sophisticated investors with high net worth. The U.S. govern-
ment deems them “accredited investors,” and the criteria for becoming one are
lengthy and restrictive.
high-water mark A hedge fund applies a high-water mark to an investor’s money;
this means that the manager will only receive performance fees on that particular
pool of invested money when its current value is greater than its previous greatest
value. If the investment drops in value, then the manager must bring it back
above the previous greatest value before he can receive performance fees again.
hurdle rate The hurdle rate is an established minimum return that an investor’s
investment must earn to the application of performance/incentive fees.
kurtosis The scaled fourth power of observations in the tail distribution is kurto-
sis. The classical interpretation of kurtosis is that it measures both peakedness182 GLOSSARY
and tail heaviness of a distribution relative to that of the normal distribution.
Consequently, its use is restricted to symmetric distributions. A high kurtosis
portrays a chart with fat tails and a low, even distribution, whereas a low kur-tosis portrays a chart with skinny tails and a distribution concentrated toward
the mean. It is also called the volatility of volatility.
leverage Leverage is the extent to which a fund is utilizing borrowed money.
A highly leveraged fund or company is considered a risky investment because it
might not ﬁnd lenders in the future. Leverage is not always bad, however; it can
make both gains and losses much more extreme than otherwise possible.
management fee The management fee is calculated as a percentage of a fund’s net
asset value. The fee may range from 1 to 4 percent, but 2 percent is the standard
ﬁgure. This is the fee intended to compensate the managers for professionally
managing the investor’s assets.
omega The omega measure provides the information about benchmark returns that
is relevant in the tail of the distribution curve. Omega calculations involve a com-
plicated framework, but it captures all the information about portfolio returns
and expresses it in a manner that is intuitive from an investment performance
viewpoint.
performance fee The performance fee or incentive fee is calculated as a percentage
of the fund’s proﬁt, considering both realized and unrealized gains. Typically
the fund manager charges 20 percent of the returns as a performance fee.
prime brokerage This is a package of services offered by the investment banks
to the hedge funds. The advantage that a hedge fund enjoys is that the prime
broker provides a centralized securities clearing facility for the hedge fund, and
the hedge fund’s collateral requirements are netted across all deals handled
by the prime broker. The prime broker in turn beneﬁts by earning fees on
ﬁnancing the client’s long and short cash and security positions, and by charging,
in some cases, fees for clearing and/or other services.
redemptions Redemptions are withdrawals from hedge funds by investors which
are sometimes subject to lock-up periods, gating clauses, or other terms.
risk budgeting Risk budgeting is the process of decomposing the aggregate risk of a
portfolio into its constituents on a quantitative basis; setting risk limits to each
asset class, factor, and/or investment manager; allocating assets in compliance
with risk budgets; monitoring the use or abuse of risk budgets on an ongoing
basis; analyzing the results; and improving the investment process.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) The U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) exists to protect investors; to maintain fair, orderly, and
efﬁcient markets; and to facilitate capital formation.
sell side Banks and brokers are the main constituents of the sell side. The term refers
to ﬁrms that take orders from buy side ﬁrms and then work the orders. Sell side
ﬁrms are paid through commissions charged on the sales price of the stock. Sell
side ﬁrms employ research analysts, traders, and salespeople who collectively
strive to generate ideas and execute trades for buy side ﬁrms, enticing them to
do business.
Sharpe ratio The Sharpe ratio considers total risk and is more suitable for diversiﬁed
portfolios. The ratio is most commonly used because it has desirable properties,Glossary 183
such as proportionality to the t-statistic (for returns in excess of zero) and
the centrality of the Sharpe ratio squared to optimal portfolio allocation. But
the ratio is leverage invariant and does not incorporate correlations and risksinvolving higher movements.
short-sell Short-selling is the sale of a security that the seller does not own, or a
sale that is completed by the delivery of a security borrowed by the seller. Short-
sellers assume that they will be able to buy the stock at a lower amount than
the price at which they sold short. Short-sellers make money if the stock price
goes down.
soft dollar A soft dollar payment is a payment made by institutional investment
funds to their service providers. Usually soft dollars are incorporated into bro-
kerage fees, and the expenses they pay for may not be reported directly.
Sortino ratio The Sortino ratio adjusts by drawdown. The ratio does not consider
up movements in volatility but only underperformance and some threshold of
MAR. Sortino can look deceptively high/favorable (upon trend reversal) if the
ex-post estimation is based on a period of upwardly trending returns, since
downside deviation underestimates the two-sided risk if the estimation period
is not long enough to include loss periods.
standard deviation The standard deviation is often used by investors to measure
the risk of a stock or a stock portfolio. The basic idea is that the standard
deviation is a measure of volatility: The more a stock’s returns vary from the
stock’s average return, the more volatile the stock.
third-party marketing Third-party marketing, in the context of a hedge fund def-
inition, refers to a set of sales and marketing services offered to hedge fund
managers by specialized marketing ﬁrms. Provided services may include the
production of marketing materials such as pamphlets and spreadsheets, the
management of advertising in media, analyzing investment market statistics,
and customer relations management. The role of third-party marketing ﬁrms is
to serve as a bridge between fund managers and potential investors. Third-party
marketing ﬁrms can offer recommendations; contact assistance; and compar-
ative ratings of hedge fund risk ratings, performance in the market, and fee
structures.
